# https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/nvidia-nemotron-model-reasoning-challenge/discussion/708535

Topic #708535: 10th Place Solution
  Author: Rick
  Posted: 2026-06-16 03:31:13.028000
  Votes: 14  Comments: 1

Many thanks to NVIDIA and the Kaggle staff for organizing the Nemotron Model Reasoning Challenge, and congratulations to everyone who placed. This was a great competition to work on, and I learned a lot from building a fully deterministic data pipeline around a single base model.



Overview

Our solution was based on deterministic program-generated reasoning traces rather than LLM distillation. For each task category, we built symbolic reasoners that derive answers from the prompt alone, then fine-tuned a single base model to imitate those reasoning procedures.




Method



Program-based deterministic reasoners generate Chain-of-Thought (CoT) traces for synthetic problems across 9 task categories.

Each reasoner re-derives the answer from the prompt alone. It never reads the ground-truth answer and emits a step-by-step CoT ending in \boxed{answer}.

We then SFT a single base model with LoRA on those traces so it learns the reasoning procedure, not just the answer.


Base model



nvidia/NVIDIA-Nemotron-3-Nano-30B-A3B-BF16
30B Mixture-of-Experts, approximately 3B active parameters.


Scores



Public LB: 0.860

Private LB: 0.880

Placement: 10th


The main lesson was that the final score was mostly limited by the quality and coverage of the deterministic teachers. Once the traces were clean, compact, and consistent, the model could imitate them surprisingly well.



Core idea — Synthetic data + procedure learning

Each category has a program-based deterministic reasoner that re-derives the answer from the prompt alone. The stored answer is never used during trace generation. The generated trace explains the procedure step by step and ends with \boxed{answer}.

The corpus tokenizes each example with the chat template, masks the prompt tokens with mask=0, and trains only on the completion tokens with mask=1. This lets the LoRA adapter learn the generated reasoning procedure rather than only the final answer.

A useful working assumption was that, given clean and consistent traces, SFT could imitate the teacher reasoner closely. Therefore, validation accuracy was largely bounded by the reasoner's own oracle accuracy. The main lever was improving the coverage and learnability of the generated traces, rather than relying on SFT hyperparameter tricks.



Oracle coverage by category




Category
Found
Total
Accuracy




bit_manipulation
1582
1602
98.8%


cipher
1576
1576
100.0%


cryptarithm_deduce
59
659
9.0%


cryptarithm_guess
13
164
7.9%


equation_numeric_deduce
555
596
93.1%


equation_numeric_guess
56
136
41.2%


gravity
1597
1597
100.0%


numeral
1576
1576
100.0%


unit_conversion
1594
1594
100.0%


TOTAL
8608
9500
90.6%






Main reasoner improvements

The largest gain came from bit_manipulation, where the reasoner was rewritten to match the true task structure more closely. A smaller but important improvement came from equation_numeric, where candidate ordering and unseen-operator guessing were improved using corpus statistics.



bit_manipulation trace update

The main reasoner change in this solution was to rewrite the bit_manipulation generator from a per-bit logical-operation matcher into a rotate/shift key-table reasoner.

This improved reasoner oracle accuracy from 1364/1602 = 85.14% to 1582/1602 = 98.75%, while replacing long, loop-prone traces with shorter derivations that were easier for the model to copy.

Background

The original generator modeled every output bit as a logical operation over fixed input columns. For each output column, it searched candidate families such as Identity, NOT, constant 0, constant 1, AND, OR, XOR, AND-NOT, OR-NOT, and XOR-NOT.

It then found operand pairs whose columns reproduced the output, built left and right stride runs, truncated them to eight bits, and filled the middle slots by a category vote.

This representation did not match the actual task structure well. The underlying transform was a rotate-and-shift composition rather than arbitrary per-bit boolean logic over fixed columns. As a result, many problems could not be expressed well by the old family search, which limited the oracle ceiling to 1364/1602 = 85.14%.

The traces were also long and enumeration-heavy, with repeated Left, Right, Best, Truncated, Tentative, Preferred, and Matched sections. These traces were difficult for the model to imitate reliably and sometimes encouraged runaway generation loops.

Key-table reasoner

The reasoner was redesigned around the rule that generates the data:

out[i] = F(rotl(x, a)[i], shl(x, b)[i], shr(x, c)[i])


Here:



rotl is the input rotated left by a, where a ranges from 0 to 7.

shl is the input shifted left by b, where b ranges from 1 to 7 with zero fill.

shr is the input shifted right by c, where c ranges from 1 to 7 with zero fill.

F is a shared 3-input boolean function used for every bit.


Instead of naming F, the reasoner reads it from the examples as a key table that maps each 3-bit key to an output bit.

The offsets (a, b, c) are recovered from boundary bits where one operand is forced to zero. At bit 0, shr = 0; at bit 7, shl = 0. Therefore, each boundary output column must be a function of only two input columns. Scanning single columns and column pairs at these boundaries constrains (a, b) from bit 0 and (a, c) from bit 7.

Each surviving candidate (a, b, c) is then verified against every example. The reasoner accumulates the key table example by example and rejects a candidate as soon as a conflict appears. The first candidate whose table covers all keys needed for the question is selected.

Ties and uncovered keys fall back to agreement, where the same prediction must appear twice and unknown values are filled with 1, or to a per-bit majority vote. The stored answer is never used during this process.

Trace efficiency

The trace was shortened without changing any answers.

Redundant per-example bit echoes were removed because verification only needs the transposed columns. The candidate List: enumeration was also removed, since it was the largest source of long traces and often caused runaway generation loops. The candidate walk now iterates the set directly.

Additional boundary scans for bits 1 and 6, then bits 2 and 5, are only run when the candidate set is large. This is gated by a count threshold of _THRESH = 24.

Keys are rendered compactly in key&gt;value form.

Remaining oracle failures

The reasoner still fails on 20/1602 problems.

All 20 problems are expressible within the rotate/shift plus key-table family, so there were no failures caused by the rule being outside the reasoner's hypothesis class. The remaining failures come from ambiguity in identifying the rule from the given examples.

Of these 20 failures, 11 are inherently underdetermined. In these cases, the question requires a 3-bit key that never appears in the examples, leaving a hole in the key table. The reasoner must fill the missing value through fallback logic such as filling with 1 or using a majority vote, but the examples do not contain enough information to determine the answer uniquely.

The other 9 failures are candidate-selection errors. In these cases, at least one consistent (a, b, c) decomposition gives the correct answer, but multiple decompositions are consistent with the examples. The reasoner's selection order or fallback path chooses a different consistent candidate, leading to the wrong answer.

Token budget

Not all regenerated traces fit within an 8192-token budget. In total, 1578/1602 bit_manipulation examples were included, meaning 24 examples were dropped and did not provide training traces.

These excluded cases were mainly heavy examples with candidate explosion.

Result

Reasoner oracle accuracy improved from 1364/1602 = 85.14% to 1582/1602 = 98.75%.

On the validation subset, the reasoner was oracle-correct on 169/169 problems without introducing regressions.



equation_numeric trace update

equation_numeric asks the model to recover the rule behind an operator glyph ◯ in expressions such as:

a ◯ b = out


The glyph is arbitrary and its meaning changes per problem. There are two subtasks:



deduce — the queried glyph appears in the examples.

guess — the queried glyph does not appear in the examples.


Both changes leave the search core untouched:



deduce — reorder which candidates are tried.

guess — improve unseen-operator prediction using corpus statistics.


Three corpus observations

These observations were verified on the real data.




Operations are frequency-skewed.

add, mul, sub(a-b), and abs dominate the corpus.


   add        250
   mul        247
   sub(a-b)   233
   abs        159


The glyph - maps to signed subtraction 52% of the time, and sub outnumbers neg-abs by roughly 3:1.

Therefore, frequent and conventional operations should be tried first.




The wrapper is shared across a whole problem.

Operand reversal, result reversal, and sign formatting were shared across a whole problem in 688/688 cases.

Therefore, solving a single operator can pin the wrapper, which can then be reused for an unseen one.


Operations usually do not repeat within a problem.

Operations did not repeat within a problem in 676/688 cases.

Therefore, an unseen operator is most likely an unused operation.


deduce — fixing the candidate trial order

For deduce, the main change was to reorder candidates by frequency and to make - try conventional signed subtraction before absolute difference.

With a single example, several operations can match at once. In that case, trial order alone decides which operation is accepted.

Baseline — abs tried first:
  97-03 = 94:  |97-03| = 94  match   &lt;- accepted
               97-03   = 94  match   &lt;- also correct, skipped
  apply 52-99: |52-99| = 47          &lt;- wrong

After — '-' tries subtraction first:
  97-03 = 94:  97-03   = 94  match   &lt;- accepted
               |97-03| = 94  match   &lt;- also correct, skipped
  apply 52-99: 52-99 = -47           &lt;- correct


Result: deduce oracle improved from 541 to 555, a gain of +14.

guess — rebuilding both axes of the guess

For guess, the queried glyph does not appear in the examples, so the reasoner must infer both:



which operation to use;

which wrapper to apply.


The output has the form:

wrapper(op(a, b))


The previous guess reasoner fixed op to absolute difference and only borrowed the wrapper from the most frequent operator. This gave 21/136 oracle accuracy. We reworked both the operation choice and the wrapper choice.

A. Choosing the operation

The operation is selected in two steps.




If the glyph has a conventional meaning, use it when available.



+ → addition

- → signed subtraction

* → multiplication

This convention is used only if no seen operator already uses that operation.


Otherwise, choose the first unused operation from the candidate trio:


   addition, absolute difference, multiplication


The order follows corpus frequency.

The difference slot here is unsigned absolute difference. For arbitrary glyphs, the result is almost always non-negative, so the unsigned form gets the sign right more often.

B. Choosing the wrapper

An unseen operator has zero examples, so its wrapper cannot be derived from itself.

Using the observation that the wrapper is shared across a whole problem, the seen operator with the most examples is solved in full to pin the wrapper. That wrapper is then reused for the unseen operator.

Skipping this step often leaves the operation right but the answer shifted, for example 4 becoming 04.

Worked examples




Problem ID
Query
Glyph convention
A seen operator uses
Chosen op
New
Gold
Baseline




1c4861e6
12*91
multiplication
- = abs diff
mul, convention free
993
993
79 ✗


07aef27f
22-84
subtraction
* = multiply+1
sub, convention free
-62
-62
62 ✗


0c0683c3
79"59
none
- = abs diff
add, top unused
138
138
20 ✗




Example of the fallback in step A.2:

77+42


In this problem, addition and absolute difference are both already in use, so the reasoner chooses multiplication:

77 × 42 = 3234


This is within 1% of the gold answer, 3235.

Result: guess oracle improved from 21/136 to 56/136, a gain of +35.



Training &amp; hyperparameters




Item
Setting




Data scope
Full training data, no OOF exclusion


Token filter
Exclude samples over 8192 tokens


Priority
Mix self-priority, y-trap bit_manipulation, and dictionary-search cipher at 2x each


LoRA rank
32


LoRA alpha
128, so lora_alpha / r = 4


LoRA dropout
0.0


Target modules
q_proj, k_proj, v_proj, o_proj, in_proj, out_proj, up_proj, down_proj


lm_head LoRA
Enabled. lm_head is added to the target modules above


max_seq_length
8192


Learning rate
2e-4


Scheduler
lr_scheduler_type=linear, warmup_ratio=0.0


Epochs
2


Effective batch size
32


Sampling
Stratified sampling




Priority samples were examples or demos associated with known fragile failure modes. They were duplicated at 2x so the model saw those traces more often without overwhelming the original distribution.



Additional techniques

Add low-logprob problems and retrain

Low-logprob problems were added or duplicated in the training corpus as priority samples, then SFT was run again.

This was not just a way to increase data volume. It was a way to re-expose traces that the model tended to forget, or traces where boundary decisions were fragile.

Demos for failure patterns, such as candidate acceptance/suppression in bit_manipulation and dictionary search in cipher, were mixed in with the same idea. The objective was to repeatedly train the reasoning steps the model was weak at and compress them into a single adapter.

Raising the LoRA alpha

To make the adapter follow the deterministic CoT more strongly, the final recipe used:

lora_alpha / r = 4


This improved CV.



Validation strategy

Held-out split

950 problems were excluded from training and used as a fixed validation set. Accuracy was tracked per category.

Oracle ceiling and fidelity

Since the model imitates the reasoner, we compared model accuracy against the reasoner's own oracle accuracy and monitored how closely the model reached that ceiling.

This made it easier to separate two failure modes:



the reasoner itself produced the wrong answer;

the model failed to imitate a correct trace.


Learnability analysis

Per-example and per-epoch log probabilities were used to identify examples and trace steps that were difficult for the model to learn.

This helped identify fragile traces that should be simplified, duplicated, or converted into targeted demos.

Iterative evaluation

Each reasoner change was evaluated per category. We checked not only the net score change, but also whether improvements in one area introduced regressions elsewhere.



Attempts that did not improve results

Curriculum learning

Easy-to-hard staged batching within each epoch was tested using difficulty bands, with noisy or mislabeled examples isolated as the final stage.

Accuracy and training stability did not change meaningfully, and no clear benefit was observed.

Two-stage training

Two-stage training was also tested by continuing from an existing adapter and fine-tuning only on targeted failure-mode demos.

Some local gains appeared, especially for y-trap-style cases, but adding stages tended to redistribute wins and losses rather than produce a robust net gain.

In the end, mixing the same demos from the start in a single-stage run was more stable, and the extra stage management did not justify itself.

3x priority duplication

Increasing priority strength to 3x overfit and reduced performance.

Priority was useful, but too large a multiplier distorted the overall training distribution.

Excluding failed or low-confidence reasoner traces

We tried excluding traces for incorrect or low-confidence problems because they were expected to negatively affect model learning.

However, accuracy decreased after removing them. This suggests that learning from failure patterns may also provide useful signal.

In the code, these low-confidence examples were often represented as rule_unknown: cases where the reasoner could not confidently identify the correct rule but still emitted a fallback trace.

Cryptarithm trace update

A large reasoner-side effort was made to generate traces not only for concat and rev_concat, but also for add, sub, and mul operations.

However, because issues such as logical jumps still occurred at a nontrivial rate, the model was not able to learn these traces stably.

LoRA merge / model merging

Model merging was tested as a way to compress complementary adapters into a single LoRA.

Both SVD merge and seed soup failed to beat the single best adapter. SVD merge could not extract complementarity within rank 32, and seed soup degraded to the level of the worst member.

Even when adapters were complementary at the output level, averaging or compressing LoRA weights tended to produce intermediate behavior rather than selecting the strongest behavior from each model.



Results




Run
Validation
Public LB
Private LB
Notes




Best public-LB run
832/950 = 0.876
0.872
0.852
Validation split, bit_manipulation with 2-input traces


Best private-LB run
859/950 = 0.904
0.860
0.880
Full train, bit_manipulation with 3-input traces, training strategies described above




The final selected run had a lower public score but a higher validation score. It ultimately performed better on the private leaderboard.

The private split may have contained more difficult bit_manipulation problems, or its distribution may have differed from the public split. In this case, selecting by validation rather than public LB gave the better private result.



Takeaways

The most important lesson was that, for this competition, improving the deterministic teacher was more valuable than changing SFT hyperparameters.

Once the traces were clean and compact, the model could imitate them well. The final gains came mainly from matching the reasoner hypothesis class to the true task structure, especially in bit_manipulation, and from using targeted priority samples for fragile reasoning patterns.

The solution was therefore less about finding a sophisticated training trick and more about building a reliable synthetic teacher: one that was accurate, deterministic, compact, and easy for the model to copy.

Comments:
├─ MAJ0RT0M (2026-06-18 17:27:25.093000) [+1]
│  Very nice bit manipulation solver!
│  
│  I used a truth table approach for the arity 3 segment of the byte transform but didn't think to use one for the arity 2 (or 1) flanks
