# https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/neurogolf-2026/discussion/726653

Topic #726653: 9th place solution
  Author: Yiheng Wang
  Posted: 2026-07-16 00:05:38.601000
  Votes: 66  Comments: 22

My NeuroGolf Pipeline and Key Tricks

Overview

NeuroGolf asked competitors to solve 400 ARC-AGI tasks with ONNX models while minimizing model cost.

My system-first approach was inspired by the fourth-place solution to the 2025
Google Code Golf Championship, Parallel Sampling + Rule-based Prompt
Generation [1]. Their published system ran many Codex attempts in parallel, verified
the candidates, selected the best valid result, and used structured prompts to
drive the next round. They also mixed iterative refinement with from-scratch
sampling to escape local optima.

I had used the then-current GPT-5 Codex during that competition as well, but in
my experience it was not yet reliable enough to make this style of automation
consistently productive. Still, the fourth-place writeup stayed with me: I
wanted to try the same basic idea when a problem and a stronger model made it a
better fit. NeuroGolf provided exactly that setting. It had 400 independent
tasks, a mechanical verifier, and a scalar optimization objective; meanwhile,
GPT-5.5 felt substantially more capable at sustained repository-level work.
So my first move was not to optimize tasks one by one, but to build the system
that would optimize them.

The competition's early phase repeatedly exposed scoring loopholes and
validator edge cases. Around May 6, the scoring standard changed, so this
writeup starts from that reset rather than covering the earlier
loophole-driven phase.

Under the new metric:

cost = memory + parameters
score = max(1, 25 - ln(max(1, cost)))


MACs were diagnostic only. This completely changed the optimization target: computation was effectively free, while parameters and intermediate tensors were expensive.

My first safe online bundle after the reset landed in second place. Within a couple of days of further optimization under the new metric, it moved into a clear first place, ahead of the field, and held that lead for roughly 15 days. This was likely helped by a head start I hadn't fully appreciated at the time: during the exploit-heavy weeks before the reset, I had already been adding constraints to my optimization targets to avoid relying on scoring loopholes, so the underlying models were "correct" rather than loophole-dependent well before the reset made that distinction matter. All 400 tasks eventually passed.

The result came from two complementary pipelines:



a Codex scheduler for high-throughput implementation and validation;

a ChatGPT webpage workflow for long-context semantic analysis and architecture discovery.




The Per-Task Optimization Unit

Before introducing the scheduler, it is useful to define what one optimization
task looks like. Each of the 400 tasks is an independent program-synthesis
problem: given a small set of input/output examples, produce the cheapest ONNX
graph that implements the same transformation.

What a Worker Reads

A worker does not receive only the examples and the incumbent ONNX file. Its
context combines four kinds of information:




Context layer
Main sources
Purpose




Task evidence
dataset/taskNNN.json
The known input/output examples from which the worker re-derives the semantic transformation and its invariants.


Current implementation
output/taskNNN.onnx, attacks/attack_tNNN.py, and docs/task-NNN.md
The actual graph, its reproducible builder, the current algorithm and cost breakdown, previous experiments, and all known hidden/online risks. These are the only persistent files the task worker may modify.


Shared optimization knowledge
docs/tricks.md and, depending on the prompt mode, chatgpt/sources/scorer_policy.md, tricks_curated.md, and tricks_final.md
The scorer rules and hard gates, reusable ONNX constructions, operator-specific cost tricks, runtime constraints, successful transfers, and known online-fatal patterns. These shared playbooks are read-only for parallel workers.


Search state
The task row in reval_scores.txt, persistent TaskState, prior-turn summaries, failure logs, and preserved candidates
The accepted score/cost, current target, what has already been tried, why it failed, and whether the next turn should optimize, repair, or rethink the method.




The worker also receives an external semantic reference from the Python
code-golf solutions. It runs:

python automation/notebook_task_hints.py --task NNN


This helper returns three useful views: the method notes immediately above the
task in the winning-solutions notebook, that notebook's golfed Python
implementation, and the corresponding Python reference solution from
NeurIPS-Code-Golf-2025/solutions/taskNNN.py. These solutions are not
translated mechanically into ONNX. They are alternative descriptions of the
algorithm, often exposing a much simpler invariant than the incumbent graph.

Finally, the repository's checker and task-local attack script form the
validation interface. Workers may create disposable probes under tmp/, but
the dataset, global playbooks, Python references, score table, and shared
scorer/checker code remain read-only. Only the task's three-file unit is
eligible for promotion.

The worker must return a correct ONNX model. Correctness is the hard constraint;
among correct models, the objective is to minimize the official cost:

cost = memory + parameters


Why Every Task Has Three Files

An ONNX binary alone is not enough for iterative optimization. I therefore
treat each task as a three-file unit:




Artifact
Role
Why we keep it




output/taskNNN.onnx
The executable submission artifact
This is the graph evaluated by the checker and the competition runtime.


attacks/attack_tNNN.py
The reproducible builder and test script
ONNX is an opaque binary. The script records exactly how the graph was constructed, makes structural changes reviewable, and lets us rebuild and validate it.


docs/task-NNN.md
Durable task memory
It records the inferred rule, assumptions, current architecture and score, experiments, failures, and hidden-test risks so that later turns do not rediscover the same facts.




As a concrete reference, I attached the complete three-file unit for T001 to
this writeup: attack_t001.py, task-001.md, and task001.onnx. Together they
show the intended relationship between the artifacts: the attack script is the
readable and reproducible source, the task document explains the semantics,
cost history, validation evidence, and known risks, and the ONNX file is the
generated executable submitted to the evaluator. The binary is therefore not
an unexplained end product; it can be traced back to both its construction and
the reasoning that justified it.

Temporary probes may be written under tmp/, but they are disposable and are
not part of the accepted task state. The three files above move together: a
successful turn promotes all of them, while a failed turn restores all of them.
This keeps the executable model, its source, and its explanation synchronized.

examples + Python references + shared tricks
                    +
      current three-file state + score/history
                    |
                    v
             Codex experiment
                    |
                    v
           candidate three-file state
                    |
                    v
         correctness and cost validation
               /                \
          accept              reject
     promote all three    restore all three


This task boundary also makes parallel execution safe: each worker owns one
attack script, one document, one ONNX output, and one scratch area. Workers can
optimize different tasks concurrently without editing the same files.

Pipeline 1: The Multi-Turn Codex Scheduler

Why I Built It

NeuroGolf contains 400 independent optimization tasks. Optimizing each task
may require several attempts: understanding the current ONNX graph, testing a
new representation, diagnosing its failure, and repairing the best candidate.

I could not supervise this process continuously through interactive CLI
sessions. Launching 400 agents simultaneously was also impractical because of
model-concurrency, CPU, memory, logging, and recovery constraints. Instead, I
built a scheduler that runs a bounded pool of Codex workers while preserving a
separate multi-turn session for every task.

This moved the human role up one level. I selected queues, prompt strategies,
concurrency, and stopping rules; the scheduler handled execution, validation,
rollback, and recovery.



How It Works

The scheduler keeps at most N workers active. When one worker finishes, the
next queued task immediately takes the free slot, so fast tasks do not wait for
the slowest task in a fixed batch.

Each task owns persistent state including its Codex session ID, accepted cost,
turn number, no-improvement streak, previous summary, and best failed
candidate. The first turn starts a new session with codex exec; later turns
continue the same reasoning context with codex exec resume &lt;session_id&gt;.
Consequently, a worker can repair a concrete failure instead of rediscovering
the task from scratch on every attempt.

Before each turn, the scheduler backs up the task-owned files. The worker then
experiments only within that task's attack script, documentation, ONNX output,
and scratch directory. Its result passes through a transactional gate:



Run the strict ONNX checker and shape inference.

Verify runtime correctness on every available example.

Measure the official cost: memory + parameters.

Promote the candidate only if it is correct and strictly cheaper.

Otherwise restore the backup, optionally preserving a promising candidate
for a later repair turn.


In short, every turn follows:

backup -&gt; experiment -&gt; validate -&gt; promote or restore


The next prompt depends on the result. An improvement receives a lower target;
a near-correct model receives a repair prompt; a failed representation receives
a method-rethink prompt. Tasks stop after their round or no-improvement limit.

All session state and results are checkpointed in sessions.json,
results.jsonl, and per-turn logs. Interrupted waves can therefore resume
without repeating completed work or losing task-specific reasoning context.

Closing the Loop After a Wave

Local validation was necessary but not sufficient. The public task examples
were small, while the online evaluator could exercise additional inputs. After
the scheduler had run for a while, I therefore paused optimization and closed
the loop in two stages.



1. Submit the Changed Tasks and Locate Regressions

I packaged the modified ONNX files into a submission archive, with the last
accepted models supplying the unchanged tasks. For that archive I knew the
expected local gain:

expected gain = sum(new local task scores - previous accepted task scores)
online gap    = expected gain - observed online gain


If the online gain matched the local estimate, the changed tasks were treated
as online-confirmed. A material gap meant that one or more candidates had
overfit the known examples, relied on an unsafe runtime assumption, or behaved
differently on hidden inputs.

When an archive contained several changes, its total score did not identify
the failing task directly. I located failures with differential submissions:
split the changed-task set into smaller groups, submit archives that differ by
only one group, compare their score deltas, and repeat until the responsible
task or interaction is isolated. This is effectively a binary search over the
wave. Rejected candidates were reverted or quarantined, and the observed
failure mode was added to the task document under its hidden/online warnings.

2. Consolidate Online-Proven Tricks

Successful task optimizations produced reusable ideas: graph rewrites,
operator substitutions, carrier constructions, cost formulas, and warnings
about transformations that looked valid locally but failed online. These
lessons were more valuable than the individual score improvement because they
could unlock other tasks in later waves.

Parallel workers did not edit the shared docs/tricks.md directly. Instead,
each worker recorded its result in the task document, and the scheduler emitted
a round-level trick-candidate report. After online evaluation, one serialized
Codex consolidation step reviewed only the confirmed successes and merged the
generalizable parts into docs/tricks.md. It also preserved the conditions
under which each trick was safe; online failures became explicit negative
examples rather than recommended techniques.

scheduler wave
     |
     v
package changed tasks -&gt; online submission -&gt; compare local/online deltas
                                                |
                         +----------------------+----------------------+
                         |                                             |
                    score matches                                  score gap
                         |                                             |
              mark online-confirmed                       group/bisect submissions
                         |                                             |
              collect trick candidates                    isolate and revert failure
                         |                                             |
                         +----------------------+----------------------+
                                                |
                                                v
                              update task docs and hidden-risk history
                                                |
                                                v
                         serialized Codex update of `docs/tricks.md`
                                                |
                                                v
                                      prioritize the next wave


This review stage turned the online evaluator into a feedback signal for the
next scheduler wave, rather than treating a submission as the end of the
process.

Scheduler at a Glance

The multi-turn scheduler turned Codex from an interactive assistant into a
resumable optimization system:

400 independent three-file task units
-&gt; prioritized queue
-&gt; bounded worker pool
-&gt; one persistent Codex session per task
-&gt; repeated experiment and validation turns
-&gt; transactional promotion or restoration
-&gt; changed-task online probes and regression isolation
-&gt; serialized consolidation of online-proven tricks
-&gt; resumable global search


A Five-Day Unattended Run

One concrete example showed why automation mattered. I went on vacation from May 22 to May 26 and left a low-concurrency scheduler job running for five days.

The last verified local snapshot before the run scored 7516.01. The
accumulated changes were consolidated in the May 26 commit, where the verified
local score reached 7575.78 (and the leaderboard score was 7575.83).

In one unattended run:



verified snapshot gain: +59.77;

changed ONNX task models: 271;

strict cost reductions among them: 256;

cost-neutral rewrites: 15;

cost regressions retained: 0.


Representative reductions included:



T032: 48 -&gt; 32, worth approximately +0.405;

T142: 246 -&gt; 180, worth approximately +0.312;

T308: 1902 -&gt; 1478, worth approximately +0.253;

T363: 5565 -&gt; 4532, worth approximately +0.205.


This was not one universal trick. It was the cumulative value of letting many independent workers make, validate, and retain small and medium improvements while I was away.



Pipeline 2: ChatGPT Webpage

The ChatGPT workflow used a persistent Project containing stable competition knowledge:



scorer and validator requirements;

reusable ONNX patterns;

known hidden-set failures;

curated trick documents;

method-rewrite instructions;

project-wide constraints.


For each task, I generated a small upload bundle containing:



the complete dataset;

current attack builder;

task documentation;

code-golf and notebook references;

current cost breakdown;

a textual ONNX graph summary.


Workflow



Infer the semantic ARC rule.

Compare the current ONNX method with the code-golf and notebook methods.

Determine whether the problem was an expensive implementation or the wrong representation entirely.

Identify the dominant cost object.

Propose at least three distinct ONNX architecture families.

Produce a separate candidate builder without overwriting the incumbent.

Validate and score it locally.

Return failures or cost regressions to the chat for another design turn.


I also used five-task bucket chats, an approach informed by Fritz Cremer's
Kaggle discussion thread publishing per-bucket total scores [2]. ChatGPT first
audited all five tasks in a bucket, estimated where the competitor gap was
concentrated, and then selected the most promising attack set. Having those
shared bucket totals as a reference point made this more targeted than generic
auditing: for each bucket, I had ChatGPT specifically work at closing the gap
between my own bucket total and the one reported in that thread, rather than
optimizing tasks in isolation.

This pipeline was slower and required manual handoff, but it was better at semantic comparison and blank-slate architecture design. Comparing reasoning tiers directly, the ChatGPT webpage's Pro reasoning mode consistently outperformed Codex's highest ("xhigh") reasoning effort for this kind of open-ended architecture search.

The two pipelines formed a feedback loop:

ChatGPT discovers architectures and transferable ideas
    -&gt; Codex implements and searches them at scale
    -&gt; local validation produces accepted models and failure evidence
    -&gt; the shared ChatGPT knowledge base is updated




Core Tricks

1. Write directly to graph output

The graph output tensor was not charged as intermediate memory. A large final Einsum, Conv, or ConvTranspose could therefore be much cheaper than a procedural pipeline that materialized masks, labels, coordinates, and decoded images.

The most important rewrite was often:

detect -&gt; mask -&gt; coordinates -&gt; classify -&gt; decode -&gt; output


becoming:

input + compact factors -&gt; terminal operator -&gt; output


The final operator could perform enormous computation because MACs were free.

T001 (3x3-to-9x9 fractal self-similar expansion) is a clean example: the whole graph is a single 226-operand Einsum node writing output directly, at cost 98 (memory 0 + params 98). A staged incumbent — detect the nonzero outer cells, build a mask, compute inner/outer coordinates, decode the color, paint — would have had to materialize a [1,10,30,30]-scale intermediate at some stage; folding all of that into one direct-output contraction kept counted memory at zero.

2. Recompute instead of carrying state

The worst models were usually dominated by full-canvas intermediate tensors. It was often cheaper to recompute a relation independently for every output cell than to carry a compact-looking mask through several nodes.

This led to direct algebraic formulations using:



polynomial roots;

finite Fourier phases;

geometric sequences;

projective coordinates;

row and column moments;

signed interval products;

low-rank relation factors.


T017 is an example: instead of storing a [10, k] color-relation table to check whether two cells share a color, the graph recomputes "do these two input cells match" on the fly as a zero-parameter Einsum contraction (summing products of two copies of the one-hot input tensor) every time the relation is needed, rather than materializing it once and carrying it forward. That collapsed the task from cost 60 to cost 10.

3. Make one paid basis serve several roles

A coordinate, phase, palette, or relation basis could sometimes also provide:



a support mask;

branch selection;

color decoding;

constants;

occupancy tests;

output polarity.


Dead rows, unreachable coefficients, repeated marginals, transposed factors, and nullspace columns were useful sources of otherwise separate parameters.

T096 (concentric-ring/corner-cutout decoding) reused a single phase-shifted
Fourier/coordinate basis across several detector contractions instead of
giving each one its own initializer, and split one affine squared-difference
core so its two slices doubled as both the radius-comparison geometry factor
and the color classifier. That kept the graph at cost 1364 (memory 820 +
params 544) despite needing several logically distinct roles from its bases.

4. Replace tables with finite-state or number-theoretic algebra

Many ARC tasks only reached a small finite set of states. Dense lookup tables could sometimes be replaced with projective codes, roots, powers, or bounded integer arithmetic.

The strongest late example was T061:

cost 606 -&gt; 70


Instead of storing an analytic multiplication table, one direct-output
Einsum used two small witness-column selectors to certify row and column
congruence for every modulus in the task family. A shared ten-value color mask
excluded the hole channel. The construction needed only 70 parameters and no
counted intermediate memory. The important lesson was not a particular
underflow trick, but that a bounded algebraic rule could replace a much larger
explicit representation. Such rewrites still required a proof—or strong
generated tests—that the finite-state assumptions covered hidden inputs.

5. Use native operators as transport mechanisms

QLinearConv, dynamic convolution, ConvTranspose, Resize, and attribute-only pooling occasionally replaced explicit Gather, Scatter, Pad, or tile carriers.

However, exotic operators were rarely the breakthrough by themselves. Their main value was forcing a new representation of the task. Most accepted improvements still came from deleting or factoring an existing carrier.

T082 and T098 both used the graph's own one-hot input tensor as the dynamic weight of a ConvTranspose node (instead of a stored weight), with only a small constant activation tensor as the other operand. Because ConvTranspose's output was the graph output, there were no counted intermediates at all. T082 landed at cost 21 (a [1,1,7,3] stencil, 21 params); T098's dynamic-weight version replaced a depthwise same-color stencil bank that had cost 270, bringing it down to 37.

6. Treat contraction order as model state

For large Einsum graphs, algebraically equivalent operand orders could have different:



FLOAT32 signs;

underflow behavior;

correctness;

runtime.


Contraction order therefore had to be preserved and validated like any other model parameter.

T001's single 226-operand Einsum again illustrates this: reordering which operands the equation contracts first — moving small detector/selector/basis factors ahead of the broad input copies, and settling the cheaper "outer" role before the "inner" role — cut the official runtime helper by roughly 13%, and a later reassociation of the same operand multiset cut a further ~16% off an even larger 274-operand version, all at identical cost and score.



References



Parallel Sampling + Rule-based Prompt Generation — fourth-place
solution, Google Code Golf 2025

Fritz Cremer's NeuroGolf discussion topic on five-task bucket
scores




TODO: this is only a draft version, and I will finalize it in the following days.

Comments:
├─ Tony Li (2026-07-16 18:25:50.217000) [+3]
│  Congratulations, @yiheng! Winning a solo gold medal in this competition and becoming a Kaggle Competitions Grandmaster is incredible . I am genuinely very happy for you—you worked toward this momen...
  ├─ Yiheng Wang (2026-07-16 23:05:04.533000) [+3]
  │  Hi @tonylica , thanks and congrats to your prize winning!
  │  Hope we have a chance to work together again😄
    ├─ Tony Li (2026-07-16 23:24:49.540000) [+2]
    │  Thanks, Yiheng! Anytime 😄 I’d be really happy to team-up in any comp!
├─ Hai (Tom) Nguyen Thien (2026-07-21 17:02:03.687000) [+1]
│  Congratulations on your official gold and becoming GM @yiheng !
├─ Chris Deotte (2026-07-16 18:30:37.383000) [+1]
│  Congratulation @yiheng You did an impressive job solo! Congratulations on becoming a Kaggle competitions Grandmaster!
│  
│  I really like your "Five-Day Unattended Run". I have never left autonomous age...
  ├─ Yiheng Wang (2026-07-16 23:35:00.163000) [+1]
  │  Hi @cdeotte , thanks! Congrats to your winning! Your vertical and horizontal ways, as well as prompt designing methods are perfect! 
  │  
  │  For the ChatGPT Pro, on my side, it works well in the middle st...
├─ robga (2026-07-16 13:11:15.883000) [+1]
│  Great work! I was happy to see you stay in the zone in the final weeks and days.
│  Your solution isn't too dissimilar to my own (lower scoring) one. I think maybe competing solo comes with some desig...
  ├─ Yiheng Wang (2026-07-16 23:47:23.263000) [+1]
  │  HI @robga , thanks! Yes, I think a better way (for optimization challenges) may be solo first and merge late for a better ensemble.
├─ Fritz Cremer (2026-07-16 12:56:33.617000) [+1]
│  Congratulations! Glad staying solo paid off for you :)
├─ Eng Adam Al mohammedi (2026-07-16 12:36:37.740000) [+1]
│  Great work, and congratulations, Grandmaster💪🧠!
│  You waited so long for this moment, and you truly deserved it. Congratulations!
├─ [deleted] (2026-07-16 06:17:00.343000) [+1]
│  nice work bro
├─ Yiheng Wang (2026-07-16 02:48:51.930000) [+1]
│  The attachments include the three-file unit for T001 for reference
├─ thisray (2026-07-16 00:46:52.280000) [+1]
│  Congratulations on the solo gold and on reaching Kaggle Competitions Grandmaster!!
│  
│  Thanks for the detailed writeup. I’m especially curious how the "Core Tricks" emerged in practice: were they main...
  ├─ Yiheng Wang (2026-07-16 02:24:47.083000) [+1]
  │  Good question. After a few days discussion in Codex CLI, I designed a parallel optimization system for this competition.
  │  The main idea is to do "codex exec …" things for each task, since we cannot ...
├─ mudesteven (2026-07-16 00:15:56.437000) [+1]
│  Amzing work. Super impressed by your codex 5-day run we have to babysit our pipeline this entire time.
├─ Chan Kha Vu (2026-07-17 04:57:18.627000) [+2]
│  Congratulations for becoming a GM, in the most flashy show of dedication and will 🥳🥳🥳 I don't think there can be a more dramatic promotion to GM status, ever! Seeing you standing proud among teams ...
├─ Georgy Mamarin (2026-07-17 11:20:37.650000) [+0]
│  The task-level numbers in this write-up teach the metric better than any formula — congrats on the solo gold. Two favourites: T001's 226-operand Einsum writing straight to the output lands at cost ...
├─ SpeedSci (2026-07-16 10:02:09.377000) [+2]
│  Congratulations on becoming GM！
├─ Timmy Juicehouse (2026-07-16 00:20:33.110000) [+1]
│  Congratulations on becoming GM. It was no easy feat to win the solo gold medal in this battle of talent, money, resources and stamina; blood and hustle deserves!
├─ @mldsdev (2026-07-26 21:06:16.853000) [+0]
│  Always nice to see AI built on a solid architecture. If you can share how many tokens were burned? And what subscription was used?
├─ Mohit (2026-07-25 18:41:59.530000) [+0]
│  congratssss
├─ Xman (2026-07-16 00:25:49.027000) [+1]
│  Good job !
