# https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/nfl-big-data-bowl-2022/discussion/274258

Topic #274258: Beginner’s Guide to NFL Football
  Author: Charlie Craine
  Posted: 2021-09-24 21:29:46.894000
  Votes: 18  Comments: 5

I have a feeling many will want to join this competition and may not have a lot of domain knowledge about American Football / NFL. So, I thought it might be helpful to put together a guide. The NFL has a great Football 101 page if you want to dive deeper, below is my summary of an NFL game. 

NFL RULES:
The NFL Provides some great videos about the Rules of the game.
NFL Official Rulebook

NFL TEAMS




How many players are on a football team? 
Each team is made one of 11 players.  One 11-man team has possession of the football. It is called the offense and it tries to advance the ball down the field-by running with the ball or throwing it – and score points by crossing the goal line and getting into an area called the end zone.


The Offense:
Whichever team has possession of the ball is the offense. The general makeup of the offense can vary play-to-play, here are some of the positions that may be used:
• The Quarterback
• The Center
• Two guards
• Two tackles
• Two/four wide receivers
• The running back
• The Fullback
• One of two tight ends


The Defense: 
The job of the defense is to stop the offense. The 11 men on the defensive team all work together to keep the offense from advancing toward the defense's end zone. The general makeup of the defense can vary play-to-play, here are some of the positions that may be used:
• Linebackers
• Defensive ends
• Cornerbacks
• Strong Safety
• Free safety
• Nose, or defensive, tackle


The Playing field:

The field is 100 yards long and 53 yards wide with white markings on the field called yard markers to help keep track of the ball. The end-zone (or goal) is an additional 10 yards at each end of the field where each time try and score.

Timing

NFL games are divided into four 15-minute quarters, separated by a 12-minute break at halftime. 

There are also 2-minute breaks at the end of the first and third quarters as teams change ends of the field after every 15 minutes of play. At the end of the first and third quarters, the team with the ball retains possession heading into the following quarter. That is not the case before halftime. The second half starts with a kickoff in the same way as the game began in the first quarter.

If a game is tied at the end of regulation, a 15-minute overtime period will be played. In the NFL, this is sudden death and the first team to score wins. Possession is determined before the period begins by a coin toss.

Kickoffs

NFL games start with a kickoff. 

The ball is placed on a kicking tee at the defense’s 35-yard line, and a kicker kicks the ball to the opposition to take possession. 

A kick returner can catch and advance the ball. Where the player is stopped is the point from which the offense will begin their offensive drive.

If the ball is caught in their own end zone, the kick returner can either run the ball out of the end zone, or kneel in the end zone to signal a touchback to stop the play. The ball is then placed on the 25-yard line, where the offense begins play.

Further rules

Offensive possession



Running Plays


A running play is when an offensive player runs the ball either directly or handed off by the quarterback. The running back (can be quarterback, wide receiver, or another offensive player) tries to gain as many yards as possible by eluding defensive players. The play ends when the defense tackles the runner. The clock continues to run if the player is tackled within the field. 



Pass Plays


Most often the quarterback passes the football to another offensive player. A pass is complete if the ball is caught by another offensive player, usually the wide receiver, tight end or running back. f the ball hits the ground before someone catches it, it is called an incomplete pass. Time stops if the pass is dropped. The clock continues to run if the ball is caught and the player is tackled within the field. 

SCORING

The object of the game is to score the most points.



Touchdown = 6 Points


To score a touchdown, the ball must be carried across the goal line into the end zone, caught in the end zone, or a fumble recovered in the end zone, or an untouched kickoff recovered in the end zone by the kicking team. When a touchdown is scored the offense can then decide to add points to their score with either of these:
Extra Point Kick = 1 Point
Two Point Conversion = 2 Points



Field Goal = 3 Points


If the offense cannot score a touchdown they may choose to kick a field goal through the goalposts at the back of the end zone. For a field goal to be scored the field goal kicker must kick the ball through the goal-post uprights and over the crossbar. The defense tries to block the kick and stop the ball from reaching the goal post.

Teams most often go for a field goal when the kick is under 60 yards from the goal post (because it may be missed otherwise) and when it is forth down). 



Safety = 2 POINTS


A safety is worth two points is scored by the defense when the offensive ball carrier is tackled in their own goal line. 

TURNOVERS

The defense goal is to stop the offense or by stopping them within four downs or a turnover. A turnover happens when the offense loses the ball to the defense in one of two ways. 




Fumble
When an offensive player who is carrying the ball drops the ball before they are considered tackled it is a fumble. Any player on the field can recover the ball when it is fumbled, which includes the offense. The team that recovers a fumble either gets-or retains-possession of the ball.  


Interception


The defense can also catch the ball from the offense by intercepting their pass meant for an offensive player.

Source: NFL.com

Comments:
├─ Arkadiy Synovets (2021-10-05 23:43:20.677000) [+0]
│  Thank you for this info. Seems I will go and check this couple of times during working on competition: very hard to understand everything from the scratch. Hope videos with rules of football will help
├─ [deleted] (2021-09-27 22:41:42.797000) [+0]
│  Thanks for the article @crained!
  ├─ Charlie Craine (2021-09-27 22:56:06.820000) [+0]
  │  No problem, hope it helped @rahulohlan
├─ Arijeet (2021-10-04 04:51:54.920000) [+0]
│  Thanks for this article.
├─ Yasar Mehmood (2021-09-28 07:59:19.123000) [+0]
│  Thanks @crained
