# https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/data-assistants-with-gemma/discussion/487380

Topic #487380: Mid-point Prize Announcement
  Author: Paul Mooney
  Posted: 2024-03-28 22:03:39.794000
  Votes: 30  Comments: 6

The Google – AI Assistants for Data Tasks with Gemma competition is nearing its conclusion. In the meantime, we'd like to recognize 5x outstanding public notebooks that were shared within the first 5x weeks of the competition.

Topic: "Summarize Kaggle solution write-ups". In @jacoporepossi's notebook "Text Summarization with Gemma", the author does a fantastic job of introducing the Gemma model and describing how to interact with it. The notebook focuses on creating accurate summaries of Kaggle solution writeups (using the Transformers implementation of Gemma-2b-it) and uses LangChain to set up summarization pipelines involving techniques such as Stuffing, MapReduce and Refine. The author works with both the unmodified Gemma-2b-it model and also creates his own LoRa adapter by fine-tuning against a text summarization dataset. This notebook is an excellent learning resource for anyone that wants to use Gemma for text summarization tasks. Great work @jacoporepossi!

Topic: "Explain or teach concepts from Kaggle competition solution write-ups." In @nghihuynh's notebook "Unleashing Gemma's Power by Prompt Engineering", the author develops an interesting method not only to summarize winning solution writeups, but she also sets up a system allowing you to ask the model follow-up questions in order to explain the underlying concepts and provide additional details, in cases where the winning solution writeups were unclear. This notebook is an excellent learning resource for anyone that wants to work with Gemma (using the Keras implementation of Gemma-2b-it) or learn from Kaggle solution writeups. Great work @nghihuynh!

Topic: "Explain or teach basic data science concepts." In @lucamassaron's notebook "Data Science AI Assistant with Gemma 2b-it" the author goes into great detail describing retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) systems and how to build them from scratch. The generate_summary_and_answer() function generates an answer for a given question using context that is pulled from a data science themed dataset that is generated programmatically with use of the Wikipedia API. Furthermore, the author demonstrates how to use the GemmaCPP implementation of Gemma-2b-it to interact with their RAG-system on resource-constrained devices that lack a GPU. The end product is an efficient system that can be used to answer common questions about data science. Great work @lucamassaron!

Topic: "Summarize Kaggle solution write-ups." In @toshik's notebook "Gemma meets LangChain - summarize kaggle writeups", the author uses LangChain with the Keras implementation of Gemma-2b-it to set up a pipeline to summarize winning Kaggle solution writeups. The end result is a system that aggregates and summarizes the winning solutions on a per competition basis (overall summary + comparison table + individual summaries). Great work @toshik! 

Topic: "Other". In @inoueu1's notebook "Make A Smart Python Assistant with Gemma", the author creates a LoRa adapter for the Keras implementation of Gemma-2b-it by fine-tuning it against the Magicoder dataset. The author then uses samples from CODAL-Bench to demonstrate the ability of the model to produce functional Python code, and they compare the results to both GPT-4-Turbo and GPT-3.5-Turbo. We really liked how the author designed a function to demonstrate whether or not the code executes successfully, and how long it takes to run. We really appreciate these types of generalizable learning resources, and we love to see comparisons of Gemma with other models. Great work @inoueu1!

Great work everyone, we are looking forward to seeing the final results!

We'll reach out to the winning authors very soon with instructions on how to collect their prizes.

As a reminder, the final submission deadline is April 14, 2024 and to make a submission you will need to complete the submission form (as described in the submission instructions). You can find information on how final submissions will be evaluated here, along with some general tips.

We will also have 25 Kaggle swag prizes for Kagglers who upload well-documented Gemma model variations to Kaggle Models (and then make use of it within their submissions). Learn more on how to upload and publish your model.



Thank you to everyone that shared a public analysis prior to that deadline!

Comments:
├─ toshi_k (2024-03-31 06:10:00.640000) [+3]
│  We will also have 25 Kaggle swag prizes for Kagglers who upload well-documented Gemma model variations to Kaggle Models (and then make use of it within their submissions).
│  
│  
│  I released a Gemma mode...
├─ Smiling-Weeping-zhr (2024-04-14 07:33:21.863000) [+1]
│  it is great
├─ MaryLumin (2024-04-08 08:03:22.810000) [+1]
│  Brilliant!
│  I learn a lot!
├─ Inoichan (2024-03-29 14:05:49.147000) [+1]
│  @paultimothymooney 
│  
│  Hi,
│  Thank you for the update on the Mid-point Prize! I planned to submit this Notebook on "Answer common questions about the Python programming language," but it’s listed under...
├─ Richa Sinha (2024-04-21 14:01:36.427000) [+0]
│  @paultimothymooney paulmone can i get rankers solution or code ?
│  i want winner solution or code for this hack. i am not able to find solution of winner .kindly provide.
├─ tarick.morty (2024-04-17 02:07:38.447000) [+0]
│  @paultimothymooney Any update on results?
