# https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/bigquery-ai-hackathon/discussion/612730

Topic #612730: And that's a Wrap! Congratulations to our Winners!
  Author: Wei Hsia
  Posted: 2025-10-21 18:43:26.301000
  Votes: 8  Comments: 12

The BigQuery AI Building the Future of Data Hackathon is officially finished. Thank you everyone for your submissions. We would like to sincerely thank you for all of the incredible discussions, submissions, and participation that all of the participants put into this. There were so many different applications, industries, use-cases, etc., it was a great pleasure to read them all. 

It was extremely difficult to select the winners because there were so many great ones.   
The judges spent a lot of time evaluating all of the creative and awesome submissions these last 3 and half weeks. 

Judging  
Here’s a quick overview of how we determined the winners. 

We wanted to make sure a few important points were met.



Those who participated spent energy, time, and effort into this hackathon and we wanted to respond in kind. Every submission was human read and human evaluated, some multiple times.   

Given the weights of our rubric, many of the non-winning submissions were missing multiple artifacts. These were filtered out after carefully verifying that the artifacts were indeed missing.   

The use of one of the 3 categories was a hard requirement. If there was no BigQuery AI, we filtered these out as well.   

There were submissions which we could not publicly access, which was another requirement. These were evaluated and tried, we only stopped when it was clear we could not replicate it.   

Every winning submission was replicated and verified (sometimes with some minor tweaks) on our side. We ran every winning submission (among others) by actually implementing as per the instructions. We made every effort (sometimes making fixes or making the necessary DDL) to replicate the submission. If, after it was clear, it still had too many glaring holes we passed on it.   

Each submission was vetted by more than one judge (how many was dependent on the stage). We made multiple passes throughout to ensure it was fair and biases were minimized. This included the ones that were spam (thankfully the Kaggle community didn’t give too many of these! 🙂)   

Finally, there were some submissions that were great but we had to pass on them after careful consideration of the application of the technology. These filtered ones may have conflicted with our responsible use of AI policies. 


Here’s the rubric as a refresher on how we scored the submissions. 

Without further ado, announcing the winners… 

Best in Generative AI: The AI Architect 🧠

Best in Generative AI - First Place:  
TriLink: A BigQuery AI powered Enterprise Analytics Solution  
What the judges had to say:  
This submission demonstrates a variety of BigQuery AI.GENERATE functions to empower a company’s staff to better serve their customers. The write up includes a very clear impact for each one of the processes put into place. 

Best in Generative AI - Second Place:  
The AI Patent Analyst  
The submission uses AI.GENERATE_TABLE to generate a knowledge graph which can then be used for deeper analysis. It has demonstrated a clear reduction with a significant ROI advantage in patent analysis.

Best in Generative AI - Third Place:  
ESG &amp; Financial Reports Insights Agent  
This submission organizes data from multiple sources and summarizes it into a simplified writeup using the AI.GENERATE functions. The writeup shows the time savings translated from workload savings for analysts. 

Best in Vector Search: The Semantic Detective 🕵️‍♀️

Best in Vector Search - First Place:  
AI-Powered Speech Therapy for Stammering – SpeakAura AI  
This submission demonstrated BigQuery vector search capabilities using the transcripts to look for similar historical cases. It also provided impact and value statistics on why their submission would create a lasting impact on stammer patients.

Best in Vector Search - Second Place:  
ReDrugAI – Repurposing Existing Drugs as New Treatments with Google BigQuery AI  
What the judges had to say:  
The submission used vector search to help research drug discovery with similarity matching. The submission clearly states the impact on the process by reducing the costs associated with drug discovery. 

Best in Vector Search - Third Place:  
Causal RAG  
What the judges had to say:  
The submission uses ML.GENERATE_TEXT to augment the SQL for the vector search code to execute on BigQuery. 

Best in Multimodal: The Multimodal Pioneer 🖼️

Best in Multimodal - First Place:   
OncOmix AI  
This submission uses BigQuery multimodal functionality to produce insights for oncology. The write up explains the problem statement and how using AI can aid and assist in the research. 

Best in Multimodal - Second Place:   
Grid Incident Rag  
The submission uses past historical multimodal data to search and summarize patterns in previous incidents. The write up shows the impact on both cost and time that this solution can help reduce.

Best in Multimodal - Third Place:   
Auto-Updating Documentation with BigQuery AI  
The submission uses various multimodal datapoints to help auto generate documentation. The writeup explains why the problem is magnified and how their solution mitigates the issue. 

Honorable Mentions:  
Patent Intelligence: Semantic Search for Innovation Discovery  
This submission used vector search functionality in BigQuery to aid in identifying similarities or lack thereof for ideas vs patents. The writeup has analysis on how the savings translate to digestible summarizations and the time costs of each. 

County-Level Augmented Risk Intelligence System (CLARIS)  
This submission uses AI.GENERATE functions such as AI.GENERATE_BOOL to classify the level of risk based on historical weather data for insurance. They also provide a clear actionable goal and a measurable impact on their submission. 

Commendable Noteworthy Submissions:   
There were several really good ones that we wanted to mention but weren’t placed. 

QualityNexus:Multimodal DevOps Quality Intelligence  
This submission uses a lot of the AI functions to help improve developer cycles and provide a platform for actionable insights. 

Semantic Song Finder  
This submission uses vector search to find meanings in song lyrics to help you find songs. 

A big thank you again for everyone who participated!

Comments:
├─ Shanti M (2025-10-22 03:21:56.383000) [+3]
│  Finally, there were some submissions that were great but we had to pass on them after careful consideration of the application of the technology. These filtered ones may have conflicted with our re...
  ├─ supercwk (2025-10-22 05:59:49.103000) [+4]
  │  Agree! It would be great if the organizers could clarify whether any submissions were filtered for similar reasons, to help participants better understand and align with the proper use of BigQuery.
    ├─ Owen Kaplinsky (2025-10-22 14:50:28.897000) [+2]
    │  Yeah, examples of what "responsible use of AI policies" means to the team would be nice to know so we can make safer things in the future and avoid whatever they flagged!
  ├─ Wei Hsia (2025-10-22 16:49:42.103000) [+1]
  │  Hi, 
  │  
  │  We won't be individually reaching out (there would be a lot!) but we do want to clarify and address this.
  │  
  │  To clarify, it's not the use of BigQuery itself but the use of the AI model. 
  │  There'...
├─ biddahari (2025-10-22 04:37:05.830000) [+2]
│  Thanks for hosting the hackathon, team! We are from Team SpeakAura. Congratulations to all the winners!
│  Could you please let us know if we’ll be receiving any emails regarding the results and next ...
  ├─ Addison Howard (2025-10-22 13:22:08.420000) [+0]
  │  Hi there - the Kaggle team will be reaching out soon. Stay tuned!
├─ DENNO71 (2025-10-24 13:00:04.557000) [+1]
│  Congratulations to all winners and  thumbs up to the judges for a Great job. But just as a top up (To the Judges) since you went through each project write-ups , It would be great for the judges to...
├─ TANIA GHOSH (2025-10-23 18:56:02.353000) [+1]
│  Congratulations to the winners. 
│  Will the other participants receive their scores, certificates, or any feedback?
├─ Shivam Bhardwaj (2025-10-22 16:00:52.213000) [+-1]
│  Big congratulations to all the winners — well deserved!
│  Would love to know if we can get some insights into the submissions upon request.
│  Any feedback or evaluation would be super helpful for our g...
├─ Jar J (2025-11-19 17:03:44.870000) [+0]
│  I understand that organizers will not reach individual participants, but will the percentage score assigned to writeups? The writeup has still info "Judging in progress. Winners will be announced s...
├─ sl02 (2025-10-21 19:50:39.950000) [+0]
│  Congratulations to the winners!
├─ Ryang Chang Su (2025-10-22 00:01:20.277000) [+0]
│  Congratulations!
