# https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/playground-series-s3e10/discussion/394981

Topic #394981: A compilation of winning solutions from the first 10 episodes
  Author: Phong Nguyen
  Posted: 2023-03-15 12:51:56.216000
  Votes: 32  Comments: 6

See part 2 where I organize the below ideas into structured topics.

You probably have seen some of the 'Collection of helpful ideas' posts that I put together in every episode. Those summaries are separate and don't include the winning solutions that are posted a couple of days after the competition ends. By putting solutions together, not just from one episode but all, valuable lessons will be learned and winning strategies might be emerged.

I try to add a tag line that is unique for each episode. Let's get started.

Episode 1 - California Housing - RMSE metric.

Spatial feature engineering is the key here. All winners' solutions used geo-features generated from longitude and lattiude such as distance to city or the coast line.



1st place used auto ML framework AutoGluon. @kirderf

2nd place used an ensemble of GBDT methods and NN using keras_tuner. @jcerpentier


Episode 2 - Stroke Prediction - AUC metric.

Handling categorical features and a huge leaderboard shakeup.



1st place: one hot encoding giving better performance compared to other encodings, KNeighborsRegressor was used to impute BMI, compute risk factors, average ensemble of 5 best xgboost models. Randomized search over a hand-coded set of ranges. @kirkdco

5th place replaced rare categories (unknown, other) with appropriate values, added new features and select with RecursiveFeatureElimanation. Ensemble of logistic regression and GBDT models. @jcaliz

6th place made an extensive use of Optuna. He used Optuna to tune hyperparameters for LGBM, XGB, CB, Lasso and NN. Then he used Optuna to find weights to blend the 5 models. @viktortaran

8th place used a single LGBM model with ordinal encoding of a few categorical features. @k0takahashi


Epsiode 3 - Employee Attrition - AUC metric.

Integer datatype doesn't guarantee numerical features: do your EDA.



1st place added risk factors features and built a weighted ensemble of XGBoost + LightGBM + CatBoost. @bcruise

8th place reused the approach that won the first place in the previous episode with a focus on categorical encoding, chosing an appropriate choice of winsorization, ordinal and one hot encoding depending on particular features. @kirkdco


Episode 4 - Credit Card Fraud - AUC metric

Highly imbalanced data.



7th place was a weighted ensemble of 3 GBDT models, but interestingly each model was trained with a different cross validation strategy. @ramjasmaurya

10th place transformed time to hour and day and used division features from @sergiosaharovskiy. Model is CatBoost with custom focal loss tuned with Optuna TPESampler. @danmer414


Episode 5 - Wine Quality - Quadratic Weighted Kappa metric

An uncommon metric and the triumph or regression model for ordinal classification.



1st place didn't use original data and feature engineering! It used RAPIDS XGBoost - GPU. Optimize class cutoff: this is special, use regression for classification task and optimize to find threshold. @rapela

2nd place: xgboost with manual hyperparameter tuning, different testing folds in StratifiedKFold. @nhopet

3rd place was an excellent way of using public notebooks: a weighted ensemble of 6 public notebooks. @group16

4th place was a ridge regression based on a stack of 25 first level models types such as XGBoost, LightGBM, and CatBoost with differently tuned hyperparameters and minimal feature engineering. @craigmthomas


Episode 6 - Paris Housing - RMSE metric

Noisy data, outliers, fake postcode - huge leaderboard shakeup except for one.



1st place didn't provide a solution.

2nd place ranked 1st in public and 2nd in private! The solution predicted price with 3 linear regression models, each for a newly created category high/medium/low price per square. The category was generated with an extra classification model. @johng29

3rd place used three models (CAT, XGB, RF) for the first level and LGBM as a metamodel. Model parameters were tuned by Optuna. @viktortaran

4th place applied a unique cross validation scheme based on PCA together with a simple random forest model. @icfoer

5th place built seperate models for different ranges of made feature and cross validate with multiple random seeds stratified k-fold. @mscgeorges

6th place was a simple manually tuned Extreme Gradient Boost Regressor. @iamvaibhav100

8th place: a single tuned XGB model with common FE such as scaling, remove perfect collinearity, cardinality reduction, power transform etc. @kirderf

9th place used AutoGluon but within a cross validation, so final prediction is an average of k models. @brendanmoore14


Episode 7 - Reservation Cancellation - AUC metric

No feature engineering - data leakage exploit.



1st place handled data leakage extremely well: pairs of observation that have opposite labels in train only, test only and train-test. Final model is an average of XGB and LGBM models with different categorical encodings and proportion of original dataset. @hardyxu52

2nd place was a hill climbing ensemble of 16 LGBM models with a large (20-30) number of validation folds. @jcaliz

3rd place implemented a 2-level stacked model including 123 GBDT models with different hypeparameters for the first level and a NN for the second level. @craigmthomas

4th place was a (sicpy minimize) weighted ensemble of Optuna-tuned Lightgbm, XGBoost, CatBoost. @ryanbarretto

9th place was a hill climbing ensemble of 7 XGB models with target encoding for categorical features. @sergiosaharovskiy


Episode 8 - Gemstone Price - RMSE metric

Getting overwhelmed with parallel competitions and running out of taglines.



1st place was a 2-level stacked model of Optuna-tuned models with two transformed datasets. Used RFECV to select a smaller set of models. @thierryneusius

2nd place: a 2-level stacked model similar to the previous episode. @craigmthomas

3rd place generated a large number of datasets with different combination of columns and used them to train an ensemble. @peridon

6th place was a weighted ensemble of AutoGluon and autoxgb. @kirderf

7th place was a unique approach of generating features. It used 7 high-scoring public notebooks to obtain predictions for the test. It then used the highest-scoring notebook to generate test predictions and used them as groundtruth to retrain 7 earlier models to 'predict' price of the training set. Those 7 predictions are used as 7 additional features. @jbomitchell

8th place was a masterpiece with lots of detailed tuning with domain knowledge. @sergiosaharovskiy


Episode 9

From jewellery to concrete!



1st place implemented an ensemble of diverse models including ridge regression, random forest and gradient boosting methods. Performed target encoding for a feature that seems to be numerical. @ambrosm

10th place used tidymodels package from R to build an ensemble without any feature engineering or duplicate handling. @nicobarea


Episode 10 - Pulsar - log loss metric

Generalised Additive Model shines



1st place used GAM with two additional features created with XGB and LASSO @seascape.

3rd place was an ensemble of XGBoost, LGBM and GAM @adaubas.

7the place was an ensemble of very diverse models including polynomial regression, boosting, GAMs @ambrosm.

9th place used top public notebooks to build additional features @jbomitchell.

10th place applied feature engineering based on multiplication/division operations and built an ensemble @sergiosaharovskiy.




Notes:



I'm sorry if I missed any top 10 solutions and didn't include any 11+ place solutions in this post.

Some solutions apparently would make use of brilliant ideas from other contributors but I won't have time to give credit and link to them in my post. I will only mention the winners, so please click on any specific solutions to learn more.

Apparently, solutions from the same episode share many same ideas. To avoid repetition, I will describe higher ranked solutions in more detail. Please forgive me if you find my description is not a good representation of your great solutions.


Thank you if you read till the end of the post; it's pretty long. I posted another article to extract the above ideas into topics. Thank you so much for those who competed well and spent time to share their valuable knowledge with us.

Comments:
├─ Tevfik Erkut (2023-03-17 14:11:36.507000) [+1]
│  I've enjoyed reading it a lot! Thanks @phongnguyen1.
  ├─ Phong Nguyen (2023-03-17 14:48:39.667000) [+1]
  │  @peridon thank you!
├─ JEANMPIA (2023-03-15 16:28:27.787000) [+1]
│  Also note that among the best solution for a lot of recent competition, a Denoising AutoEncoder was used to smoothen the data !
│  Might be worth checking that out if you are already familiar with Neu...
  ├─ pidaparti sitapati (2023-03-16 14:35:45.933000) [+0]
  │  if possible can you share any related notebooks for reference
    ├─ icfoer (2023-03-17 12:12:26.867000) [+1]
    │  Hello. Here.
    │  I want to point out that DAE is always a lottery. It never works "acceptably" the first time. You can spend a lot of days and end up with nothing. In the end it's all about Representat...
    ├─ Phong Nguyen (2023-03-17 13:10:12.873000) [+1]
    │  Many thanks @icfoer
