# https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/ariel-data-challenge-2025/discussion/609888

Topic #609888: 1st place solution: Bayesian Inference, of course
  Author: Jeroen Cottaar
  Posted: 2025-09-30 09:29:08.289000
  Votes: 56  Comments: 11

Link to code to train and submit
This year I'm also releasing the full development history: https://github.com/jcottaar/ariel2 
I'd like to start by thanking the organizers for another great competition. I had a rather frustrating start (having somehow managed to lose all my code from last year), but greatly enjoyed it overall. The Bayesian approach is not used nearly as often as it should be these days, and I'm glad to have the opportunity to show its value here.

My solution is quite similar to last year's; my NeurIPS talk from the associated workshop can be a useful introduction. I'll briefly discuss the differences compared to last year in a reply to this post.

1. Introduction

Transit analysis is the most common method for detecting and studying exoplanets. A transit occurs when a planet crosses in front of its star relative to Earth, obscuring part of the starlight. By observing how much the light is reduced (the transit depth) as a function of wavelength, we can learn the properties of the planet. But with a tiny planet passing in front of a huge star, this problem has a very low signal to noise ratio. The challenge to us: find the transit depth, including confidence intervals, from synthetic raw spectroscopic signals as the Ariel satellite might see them in the future (For a more extensive overview, see https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/ariel-data-challenge-2025/overview).



This competition is at first glance a retread of a similar competition last year, but the data is far more realistic this time around. I think I figured out some of the changes, but not all of them - as we'll see later on.
Note that there are two sensors in play, the single-wavelength FGS sensor and the spectroscopic AIRS sensor. In this writeup I'll focus mainly on the AIRS sensor.
My general approach consists of three steps, as visualized below:



Preprocessing: starting from the raw sensor data (expressed in counts), compute the amplitude signal S(λ,t) as a function of wavelength λ and time t.

Bayesian Inference: from S(λ,t),  compute the inferred transit depth D(λ) and an uncertainty margin on this σ(λ) . This step is done using a principled Bayesian approach.

Fudging: throw the principles out the window, and apply various fudge factors to D(λ) and σ(λ) . These fudge factors are chosen to optimize score on the training data.




In sections 2, 3, and 4, I'll discuss each of these steps in turn. I'll finish with some closing thoughts in section 5 - mainly discussing why my approach isn't actually working…

2. Preprocessing

The raw data is in counts per pixel; we first need to apply several steps to come to a photon count per pixel. This is explained in a notebook shared by the hosts. I use a time binning of 5 frames for AIRS, and 50 frames for FGS (this puts them approximately in sync). Hot pixel invalidation is disabled. I also added a simple cosmic ray removal. 
The opportunity for some real improvement lies in the wavelength binning step, i.e. summing over the dispersion axis. The baseline is simple summing, but there's several effects in the data that make it possible to do better. Most notably, there's the infamous jitter, which we can see most clearly by doing a PCA (with some additional preprocessing) over all AIRS frames in the train data:



The jitter shapes presumably correspond to pointing error and defocus.

The jitter shapes sum to approximately zero over the dispersion axis; this is why simple summing works OK. It also means that any more advanced preprocessing scheme is forced to deal with the jitter, so there's a high barrier to entry. Still, there are several effects in the data that such a scheme can take advantage of:



There are invalid pixels.

The noise is not quite Poisson noise (simple summing minimized noise only for Poisson noise); the noise is lower for brighter pixels, and there are occasional very noisy pixels.

The jitter shapes don't quite sum to zero, presumably because detector calibration is not perfect.

There is a constant background signal that we'd like to remove.


I spent more than half of my time on this competition trying to set up a principled preprocessing flow optimally handling all these effects. Unfortunately, I haven't managed this yet - you'll find in the code several disjointed steps attempting to deal with the above. They also tend to work only in certain configurations and combinations, which I don't yet fully understand. It still leads to an improvement of ~0.01 over simple summing - I'll crack this one next year…

3. Bayesian Inference

Now that we have the photon counts as a function of wavelength and time, we are ready to infer the exoplanet transit depth using Bayesian Inference. 
Bayesian Inference (BI) is a powerful statistical approach, based around defining a prior (a statistical belief about reality) and observations (some form of new information). Using Bayes' law, we then combine these to find the posterior (an updated belief about reality). In our case, this means:



Prior: a description of the physics that affect the final measured signal, describing for example detector noise, drift, and the transit behavior (including the transit depth itself) as formal distributions.

Observations: the provided measurements.

Posterior: a breakdown of the observations into the various elements defined in the prior (see figure below). From this we can simply read out the desired transit depth. Importantly, the posterior is not just a single point, it's a distribution. By taking samples from this distribution we can find the required confidence intervals (and even full covariance matrices, although that is not asked of us here).


There are two key elements to applying BI: defining the prior (section 3.1), and applying Bayes' law to do the inference (section 3.2).

3.1 Prior definition

The signal is decomposed into four key components, as shown visually here:



This table shows a detailed description of all prior elements:




Prior element
Description
Tuning and hyperparameters
Degrees of freedom




Noise
Uncorrelated Gaussian per time and wavelength
Standard deviations found in preprocessing
1350 (FGS) + 317250 (AIRS)


Star spectrum
Uncorrelated value per wavelength
Not regularized (infinite sigma)
283


Drift
Third order polynomial over time and wavelength
Not regularized (infinite sigma)
3 (FGS) + 12 (AIRS)


Transit window
Found using batman package, with the following free parameters:- Transit mid-time t0 (separate for FGS and AIRS)- Semi-major axis sma- Period P- Orbital inclination i- Quadratic limb darkening u0 and u1 (including linear dependence on wavelength)- Transit depth Rp^2/Rs^2 (see below)
Covariance matrix learned on training set using maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
11 (6 limb darkening, 2 t0, sma, P, i)


Transit depth: mean
Single value
Lightly regularized (sigma=0.01)
1


Transit depth: variation
Decomposed into three components below
Scaling factor determined per planet using MLE (this is the only hyperparameter tuned during inference)
N/A


Transit depth: variation FGS
Single Gaussian value
Standard deviation found on training set
1


Transit depth: variation AIRS
Gaussian Process over wavelength, sum of two squared-exponential kernels
Kernel hyperparameters found on training set using maximum likelihood estimation
282


Transit depth: variation PCA
Fixed basis functions obtained from PCA analysis
PCA shapes and variation magnitudes found on training data (this year there seems to be no train-test population shift for the transit depths)
5




3.2 Solver

Having defined the prior, finding the posterior is 'just' a matter of applying Bayes' law. The prior is fully Gaussian, which means the inference should just be a single matrix operation. But as usual, there's a snag. In our case, it's that the relationship between the prior parameters and the observation is non-linear (because of the non-linear modeling in batman, and because some prior elements are multiplied rather than added).  
To deal with this non-linearity, we linearize the model around the mean of the posterior. This is repeated iteratively (i.e. apply BI -&gt; linearize around the new mean of the posterior -&gt; repeat). Each step we also update the single hyperparameter (the scaling of the transit depth) using gradient descent.  
This approach does mean we need a decent starting point, which is handled as follows:



Grid search: sweep over a grid of transit depth and transit mid-time to find initial values. Other transit parameters are set to the given approximation per planet (with no limb darkening).

BFGS: fit drift and all transit parameters, using BFGS as implemented in scipy.optimize.minimize. In this step we only consider the mean over wavelengths of the AIRS signal. 

Bayesian Inference: the full non-linear BI solver as described above. My winning submission uses 8 iterations of the solver; the code linked here only does 4 iterations to fit training and inference into the 9 hour submission limit (this only costs 0.001 in the score).


The prediction of the transit depth and the covariance matrix of its uncertainty can be read out directly in the posterior. The covariance matrix is approximated based on 200 samples; this is mainly a holdover from last year, when there were too many parameters to construct it explicitly.

There are two additional tricks that I apply if the residual of the first two steps (grid search-&gt;BFGS) is suspiciously high:



Use transit parameters for a different planet as starting point.

Try chopping off the first and last few frames of the signal (these sometimes have a high residual for reasons I don't understand).


4. Fudging

The prediction and uncertainty obtained above can still be improved further with some post-hoc calibration. Note that this is anathema to a proper Bayesian approach - more on that below.

We adapt the mean of the transit depth per sensor based on fitting:



A constant offset

A multiplicative factor

Dependence on the first limb darkening parameter


The variation of the transit depth over wavelength is not fudged, i.e. not changed in this step.

We adapt the uncertainty of the transit depth per sensor based on fitting:



A constant offset

A multiplicative factor for the mean of the transit depth

A multiplicative factor for the variation of the transit depth over wavelength

Dependence on the magnitude of the variation of the transit depth over wavelength


In total, the fudging has 12 parameters to fit. These are determined on the full training set, based on whichever values optimize the competition metric.

5. Final thoughts - we're missing something!

The fact that fudging helps the score is extremely worrying. And it's not subtle: last year, my solution without fudging could have gotten 1st place; my solution this year without fudging would have ended up around ~20th place. It means there's something missing in the prior, i.e. it does not describe reality (or rather the synthetic data generation process) accurately.

I've spent a lot of time trying to find this gap, but haven't gotten much closer. I've come to believe that the issue lies in the transit modeling, but none of the variation I tried (such as different limb darkening models) helped. I'm convinced that finding whatever's going on could boost our scores to well over 0.700.

Some more direct evidence of this issue can be found by comparing different transits for the same planet; the plot below shows the ratio of the transit profiles (with some preprocessing including low pass filtering). Nothing in the prior (and nothing else I can come up with) can explain this. See also this discussion and the code.


I hope the organizers are willing to reveal some clues about this, because I don't think we'll figure it out next year either without some help.

Finally, I'll wrap it up with an overview of how much various elements of my solution contribute to the score:




Change to model
Impact on private test score




Simplified loader (host's flow + cosmic ray removal), no jitter correction or background removal
-0.013


Don't remove first or last few frames of suspicious transits
-0.002


Don't use Gaussian Process for transit depth, just use PCANote: this variation does not involve any Gaussian Processes
-0.007


Don't use PCA for transit depth, just Gaussian Process
-0.011


Disable all fudging - rely purely on the outcome of the Bayesian predictions
-0.152(Last year: -0.000…)


Replace all fudging by a single multiplicative factor for the uncertainty
-0.017


Disable fudging of sigma prediction based on AIRS variation
-0.005


Disable fudging of mean prediction based on limb darkening parameters
-0.005


Don't regularize the 11 transit parameters in prior
-0.003

Comments:
├─ Jeroen Cottaar (2025-09-30 09:43:01.380000) [+3]
│  Key differences with my 2024 solution:
│  
│  
│  
│  Use batman to model transits.
│  
│  Added limb darkening to the transit model.
│  
│  PCA for transit depths is done on the training set, rather than on the test set ...
├─ Sakura (2025-10-05 12:40:40.457000) [+0]
│  Congrats!
│  
│  I wonder do you have some high-level insights on why Bayesian without NN work well in 2024 and 2025.  As our team tried end-to-end deep neural networks (DNNs) which is extremely vulnerab...
  ├─ Jeroen Cottaar (2025-10-07 08:05:31.907000) [+2]
  │  Bayesian methods have an edge here because the underlying phsyics are relatively simple, but at the same time challenging for neural networks to identify. You just can't get away with ignoring the ...
├─ Oleh Kivernyk (2025-10-01 08:00:16.177000) [+0]
│  Thanks for the nice summary, @jeroencottaar !
│  In your model you did not restrict the quadratic u1/u2 LD coefficients, so they could converge to Limb Brightening regime, right?
  ├─ Jeroen Cottaar (2025-10-01 08:44:26.513000) [+1]
  │  They are regularized but not constrained. I highly doubt they would have negative values though (that's what you mean with limb brightening right?), that'd be very far outside the training populati...
    ├─ Oleh Kivernyk (2025-10-01 09:06:58.727000) [+0]
    │  Thanks @jeroencottaar !
    │  Just for reference - Figure 1 of Kipping paper illustrates physical constraints on quadratic u1, u2 values.
    ├─ Jeroen Cottaar (2025-10-01 19:18:58.860000) [+0]
    │  I checked, and see that I already had constraints imposed on the limb darkening parameters. No negative values occcurred in my winning submission.
├─ JungleBeastDS (2025-09-30 19:26:04.147000) [+0]
│  Congrats for the 1st place finish!
│  
│  I'm curious how well your model fits the ingress/egress period.
│  
│  In my model, I also had to do adjustment to the mean transit depth and I found the likely reason...
  ├─ Jeroen Cottaar (2025-10-01 08:53:09.717000) [+0]
  │  The main reason to adjust the mean transit depth is related to how well you do the constant background correction in preprocessing. If you don't do any, you should expect a ~0.6% correction on the ...
    ├─ JungleBeastDS (2025-10-01 18:42:00.300000) [+0]
    │  There is also the issue that different limb darkening models that can fit the observed data similarly well, but lead to different transit depth estimation. 
    │  Which means there is a limit in how well...
    ├─ Jeroen Cottaar (2025-10-01 19:00:12.980000) [+0]
    │  Interesting. Perhaps the 'missing element' of my prior that leads to the need for fudging is the use of different limb darkening models for different planets (I couldn't get any improvement by swit...
