# https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/tabular-playground-series-jun-2022/discussion/334415

Topic #334415: [TPS-JUN22] Winning solutions tricks and methods
  Author: The Devastator
  Posted: 2022-07-01 13:29:56.808000
  Votes: 12  Comments: 3

Solution compilation

This is a summary of the solutions and their main tricks. 
Based on the posted writeups from the discussion forums and also as public notebooks. 

If you think I forgot something or understood something wrong - feel free to drop a comment and I will fix it.

Thank you all for posting about your solutions, you guys did a fantastic job! 
Those are absolutely insane.. 



1st Place Solution - TPS Jun Denoising AE

by Sebastian van Gerwen
An amazing implementation of DEA. 

Tricks




Random Mask Created a binomial random mask and multiplied by the original data to randomly set values to zero.


Feature-wise embeddings The model embeds both the features and the mask and adds them together. This is so it can learn a representation of where the nulls are set to zero, and therefore where to focus to impute. 


MLP Architecture  Used layer normalization with skip connections, with 7 dense layers using the mish activation function.


Output Computation Output through a final dense layer to match the dimensions with the input shape. Then, the final output is conditional on whether the value was masked. 


Masked MSE Loss Used an MSE loss that sets the value to zero according to a mask. This mask is the true data null values - thus we never calculate a loss on values that were originally in the training data, but we can still learn from those rows without creating bias by using a naive imputation method during training.


Conditional Ensemble Ran the DAE 3 times in pytorch and tensorflow - tensorflow runs performed significantly better, but the average of all performed the best.



  
Can we just stop for a moment and appreciate the amount of work put into this? incredible! 


#2 Solution

by ArturRa




Understood from the competition description that The dataset has similarities to the May 2022 Tabular Playground,… means the best model from the previous competition must be able to untangle the same patterns of the current dataset.


Used the May 2022 Tabular Playground 1# Solution notebook


Used mean technique for the F_1 and F_3 groups.


For the F_4 group, I started using one column as the target and the others as features.


Split the F_4 data into six groups: without NaNs, with one, two, three, four, and five NaNs. The first group was used for training, the others – for predicting.


Trained different models for these x-NaNs groups by changing the number of outputs for x.


Had to train a lot more than just 80 regressors. And this took a lot of time. 


Examples: 4-NaNs group here. Splitting F_4 data into six groups here.


4th place approach

by Ravi Ramakrishnan



The final approach to the columns in group F_4_ includes a simple dense neural network using keras &amp; TF.

Final submission for columns in groups F_1 and F_3 includes a combination of linear models and the descriptive statistics for these features

Also Finetuned one of my model candidates for F_4 from another notebook titled 'TPS Jun 2022 PyTorch Lightning with NA counts'


#8 solution | Neural Net like MLM

by Daru



Ensemble of 5 neural Networks. Each Network is like MLM (Masked language modeling)

Sample code can by found here


#16 Deep Magic

by Islam Tlupov




The first attempt was cycling through all of NaN using Catboost. Ended up with a pretty good score but not "the top of the top". 


Then used a heavy pytorch network which was just too heavy but seemed to work really well.


Then implemented a Keras network that was a slightly lighter network that was spread over multiple notebooks. This one was the final solution.


The solution write up includes a lot of details about the parameters used and the failed attempt, I highly recommend you to read it if you are interested. 


17th place solution

by kheti



Modeled based on the number of missing values in each record.

Discovered the distribution of the public test dataset.

Worked on the F_2 features to find some meaning

Mean Impute F_1 and F_3 and model for F_4 on this notebook

After a lot of work and submissions: Concluded that most of the public dataset might be comprised of F4 columns and maybe a few records missing in F1 and F3.

Submitted one solution with Mean Imputing F1, F3, and modeling F4 and another one with modeling for everything. The 2nd solution was better both for the public and private.

Comments:
├─ Mahendra Gundeti (2022-07-01 15:46:15.827000) [+1]
│  @thedevastator good compilation of solutions with crisp bullet points
│  
│  thanks for sharing🙌
  ├─ The Devastator (2022-07-01 15:56:00.580000) [+0]
  │  Thank you, credit should go to the people actually creating those solutions :)
├─ Rizqy Arya D (2022-07-04 07:27:27.820000) [+0]
│  Very nice compilation. Thank you for sharing.
