# https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/geolifeclef-2022-lifeclef-2022-fgvc9/discussion/325984

Topic #325984: Final week and CLEF working notes submission information
  Author: Titouan Lorieul
  Posted: 2022-05-19 13:36:22.212000
  Votes: 3  Comments: 0

Hi everyone,

First of all, thank you for your participation in GeoLifeCLEF 2022.
There are a few days left before the end of the competition (unfortunately, the deadline is strict, sorry for that).
As you have noticed, GeoLifeCLEF is a difficult challenge that involves large and varied data.
The underlying stakes are however immense for the monitoring and preservation of biodiversity on a global scale.
We therefore congratulate all of you who managed to submit runs and we are very happy to see that several of you beat the baseline models by a large margin.

Note that the public leaderboard only relies on 10% of the test data, it is thus a bit noisy and the private leaderboard (constituting the final results) might change a bit the ranking.
So make sure to select the models that you trust the most based on your validation scores and not solely on the public leaderboard scores!

GeoLifeCLEF being part of the CLEF initiative, the next step for you is to write a so called "working note", i.e., a technical report describing your methods and results.
The deadline to submit it is  June 01.
The working note doesn't have to be as detailed as an article, but it should still report the minimum necessary information to enable the reproduction of your method and results.
After a (light) review process, you will have a feedback on June 13 and then you will have more time, until July 1, to finalize the working note.

Submitting a working note is mandatory to get your results published in the scientific articles that we will write afterwards.
Any run that could not be reproduced thanks to its description in the working notes might be removed from the official publication of the results.
Working notes themselves are published within CEUR-WS proceedings, resulting in an assignment of an individual DOI (URN) and an indexing by many bibliography systems including DBLP.
According to the CEUR-WS policies, a light review of the working notes will be conducted by LifeCLEF organizing committee to ensure quality.
As an illustration, LifeCLEF 2021 working notes (task overviews and participant working notes) can be found within CLEF 2021 CEUR-WS proceedings in the "LifeCLEF: Multimedia Life Species Identification" section (see also CLEF 2020 CEUR-WS proceedings for more examples).
Last year's winning solution working notes is available here.

More information about the templates (latex, doc) to use, the mandatory information to report (about the names, affiliations, …), etc. is provided here:
http://clef2022.clef-initiative.eu/index.php?page=Pages/instructions_for_authors.html

The direct link to submit your working note through EasyChair is:
https://easychair.org/my/conference?conf=clef2022
(you first need to create an account, then submit a paper to the LifeCLEF track and choose the "Task 3 - GeoLifeCLEF" topic)

Kind regards,
GeoLifeCLEF 2022 organizers

No comments
