# https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/nfl-big-data-bowl-2024/discussion/447174

Topic #447174: NFL Jargons: Offensive Formations, Positions Abbreviations, Passing Statistics, Squad Numbers.
  Author: Marília Prata
  Posted: 2023-10-14 15:38:39.748000
  Votes: 20  Comments: 3

Offensive Formations

SHOTGUN

"The modern descendant of the Single Wing. The quarterback lines up about five yards behind the center, in order to allow a better view of the defense and more time to get a pass off. The shotgun can distribute its 3 other backs and 2 ends any number of ways, but most commonly employs one running back, lined up next to the QB, one tight end and three wide receivers. This formation is most commonly used for passing, but the quarterback can also hand off to a running back or run himself."

SINGLE SET BACK

"Also known as the "ace" or "singleback" formation, the single set back formation consists of one running back lined up about five yards behind the quarterback. The basic singleback set does not employ a fullback. The other players that are not on the line of scrimmage can either act as tight ends or wide receivers. This formation is normally used for a pass play, but can also be good for running, as defenders must move at least one player out of the middle of the field (the "box", between the tackles on the offensive line) to cover the additional wide receiver or tight end. Since an extra wide receiver is lined up in the space between the tackle or tight end and the outside wide receiver, he is called the slot receiver."

I FORMATION

"This was once one of the most common formations used at all levels of football, though it has been superseded over the past decade or so by formations that put the quarterback in the shotgun formation. "The I" consists of two backs lined up behind the quarterback, with the back closest to the quarterback being called the fullback and the back behind the fullback called the running back, tailback, or I-back. The two backs line up either in a line (hence the name of the formation since it looks like a letter I) or with the fullback "offset" to either side. The fourth back is most commonly employed as an extra wide receiver."

EMPTY backfield

"Also known simply as "Five-wide", a reference to the five wide receivers. In the empty backfield formation, all of the backs play near the line of scrimmage to act as extra wide receivers or tight ends, with the quarterback lining up either under center or, most commonly, in the shotgun. This is almost exclusively a passing formation used to spread the field, often to open up short inside routes or screen routes. The most common running play from this formation is a quarterback draw play up the middle since defensive players are spread out from sideline to sideline."

PISTOL

"It is essentially a shotgun variation, with the quarterback lined up closer than in standard shotgun (normally 3 to 4 yards behind center), and a running back lined up behind, rather than next to, the QB (normally at 3 to 4 yards behind quarterback). The pistol formation adds the dimension of a running game with the halfback being in a singleback position. This has disrupted the timing of some defenses with the way the quarterback hands the ball off to the halfback. This also allows the smaller halfbacks to hide behind the offensive line, causing opposing linebackers and pass-rushing defensive linemen to play more conservatively."

JUMBO

"Goal line formation. Also called "jumbo", "heavy", "full house" and other similar names, this formation is used exclusively in short-yardage situations, and especially near the goal line. This formation typically has no wide receivers, and often employs 3 tight ends and 2 running backs, or alternately 2 tight ends and 3 running backs. Often, a tight end or full back position is occupied by a player who normally plays offensive line or defensive line positions to act as an extra blocker."

WILDCAT

"The wildcat is primarily a running formation in which an athletic player (usually a running back or a receiver who runs well) takes the place of the team's usual quarterback in a shotgun formation while the quarterback lines up wide as a flanker or is replaced by another player. The ball is snapped to the runner, who usually has the option of either running the ball himself or handing it to another running back lined up in the backfield. The wildcat gives the runner a good look at the defense before the snap, allowing him to choose the best running lane. It also allows for ten offensive players to block, unlike in a conventional running play, in which the quarterback is usually not involved after delivering the ball to a running back."

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_formations_in_American_football

NFL Position's Abbreviations

QB Quarterback
RB Running Back
FB Fullback
WR Wide Receiver
TE Tight End
OL Offensive Lineman
C Center
G Guard
LG Left Guard
RG Right Guard
T Tackle
LT Left Tackle
RT Right Tackle
K Kicker
KR Kick Returner
DL Defensive Lineman
DE Defensive End
DT Defensive Tackle
NT Nose Tackle
LB Linebacker
ILB Inside Linebacker
OLB Outside Linebacker
MLB Middle Linebacker
DB Defensive Back
CB Cornerback
FS Free Safety
SS Strong Safety
S Safety
P Punter
PR Punt Returner

https://www.kaggle.com/code/mpwolke/nfl-bowl-2022-plays-and-players

http://stats.washingtonpost.com/fb/glossary.asp

Jersey Numbers: Squad Numbers

Jersey Numbers:

"Numbers 1 to 19 are worn by quarterbacks, kickers, and punters. Since 2004, wide receivers are also allowed to wear numbers between 10 and 19 if they so choose, even if there is an 80-89 number available. In the rare event that all numbers from 10-19 and 80-89 are taken, receivers are allowed to wear single digit numbers, such as Biren Ealy, current NFL Free Agent, on the Baltimore Ravens then wore a single digit number in the 2009 Preseason."

"Numbers 20 to 49 are worn by running backs, tight ends (who may wear a number between 40-49 when 80-89 are unavailable), cornerbacks and safeties."

"Numbers 50 to 59 are worn by linebackers and centers."

"Numbers 60 to 79 are worn by tackles, guards and defensive linemen (the defensive ends, defensive tackles or nose guard)."

"Numbers 80 to 89 are worn by wide receivers and tight ends."

"Numbers 90 to 99 are worn by linebackers and defensive linemen. In use since 1984."

"Numbers 0 and 00 are no longer used, though they were issued in the NFL before the number standardization in 1973. George Plimpton wore 0 during a brief preseason stint at quarterback for the Detroit Lions. Jim Otto ("aught-oh") wore number "00" during most of his career with the Oakland Raiders. Wide receiver Ken Burrough of the Houston Oilers also wore "00" during his NFL career in the 1970s."

https://americanfootball.fandom.com/wiki/Squad_number

Passing Statistics

CMP or CP - Completions
ATT or AT - Attempts
PCT or CMP% - Percentage of completed passes (Completions divided by pass attempts)
YDS - Passing yards
YPA - Yards per attempt
LNG - Longest pass play
TD - Touchdown passes
TD% - Touchdown percentage (Touchdown passes divided by pass attempts)
INT - Interceptions thrown
INT% - Interception percentage
SK - Sacks
SYD - Sacked yards lost
RAT - Passer (QB) Rating*

https://www.espn.com/nfl/news/story?id=2128923

More Information on Previous NFL Competitions

Deep Complex Networks
https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.09792

1st place solution The Zoo- By dott1718
https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/nfl-big-data-bowl-2020/discussion/119400

zoo_keras by Russ Wolfinger
https://www.kaggle.com/code/sasrdw/zoo-keras/notebook?scriptVersionId=25044029

Jargon by mpwolke
https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/nfl-big-data-bowl-2022/discussion/274428

Comments:
├─ Meagan Burkhart (2023-11-24 05:15:30.673000) [+1]
│  This is very helpful! Thank you for putting all this information together for those of us less familiar with football
  ├─ Marília Prata (2023-11-24 13:50:36.410000) [+0]
  │  In fact, I'm not familiar with all that NFL material too. Thank you M. Voulo.
├─ Saish Sawant (2023-11-29 14:05:58.447000) [+0]
│  thanks for this information helps for better understanding!!
