# https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/nfl-big-data-bowl-2024/discussion/447660

Topic #447660: Offensive Player Evaluation in football. Passing and Rushing models. Expected points. Win Probability & EPA.
  Author: Marília Prata
  Posted: 2023-10-16 17:17:23.268000
  Votes: 16  Comments: 0

nflWAR: a reproducible method for offensive player evaluation in football

Citation: Yurko, Ronald, Ventura, Samuel and Horowitz, Maksim. "nflWAR: a reproducible method for offensive player evaluation in football" Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports, vol. 15, no. 3, 2019, pp. 163-183. https://doi.org/10.1515/jqas-2018-0010

"Existing methods for player evaluation in American football rely heavily on proprietary data, are often not reproducible, lag behind those of other major sports, and are not interpretable in terms of game outcomes. The authors presented four contributions to the study of football statistics to address these issues."

"First, the authors developed the R package nflscrapR to provide easy access to publicly available play-by-play data from the National Football League (NFL). Second, they introduced a novel multinomial logistic regression approach for estimating the expected points for each play. Third, they used the expected points as input into a generalized additive model for estimating the win probability for each play. Fourth, they introduced their nflWAR framework, using multilevel models to isolate the contributions of individual offensive skill players in terms of their wins above replacement (WAR).

Framework for evaluating NFL plays and players

"Every football play is more complex and interdependent, with the 22 players on the field contributing in many ways and to varying degrees. A running play depends not only on the running back but the blocking by the linemen, the quarterback’s handoff, the defensive matchup, the play call, etc. A natural approach is to use a regression-based method, with indicators for each player on the field for a play, providing an estimate of their marginal effect. This type of modeling accounts for factors such as quality of teammates and competition ".

https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/jqas-2018-0010/html

Expected points (EP)

"While most authors take the average “next score” outcome of similar plays in order to arrive at an estimate of EP, the authors recognized that certain scoring events become more or less likely in different situations. As such, they proposed modeling the probability for each of the scoring events directly, as this more appropriately accounts for the differing relationships between the different categories of the “next score” response and the covariates. Once the authors have the probabilities of each scoring event, they could trivially estimate expected points."

WIN PROBABILITY (WP)
"The authors approach for estimating WP (Win Probability) also differs from the others mentioned when they incorporated the estimated EP (Expected Points) directly into the model by calculating the expected score differential for a play. Their expected points model already produces estimates for the value of the field position, yards to go, etc. without considering which half of the game or score."

https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/jqas-2018-0010/html

Expected Points Added (EPA) and Win Probability Added (WPA)

"In order to arrive at a comprehensive measure of player performance, each play in a football game must be assigned an appropriate value that can be represented as the change from state i to state f. The authors represented these values by either play i’s expected points (EPi) or Win Probability (WPi)."

"Plugging their EP and WP estimates for the start of play i and the start of the following play f into (8)’s values for Vi and Vf, respectively provides us with the two types of play valuations: (1) the change in point value as expected points added (EPA), and (2) the change in win probability as win probability added (WPA)."

"For scoring plays, they used the associated scoring event’s value y as Vf in place of the following play’s EP to reflect that the play’s value is just connected to the difference between the scoring event and the initial state of the play. "

Passing models

Rather than modeling the  (EPA or WPA) for a passing play, the authors took advantage of the availability of air yards and developed two separate models. They didn't credit the passer solely for the value gained through the air, nor the receiver solely for the value gained from after the catch. Instead, the authors proposed that the passer, receiver, and opposing defense should each have credit divided amongst them for both areas."

Rushing models

For rushing plays, the authors again model the play values. However, they build two separate models, with one rushing model for QBs (Quarter Back) and another for all non-QB rushes. This is because they cannot consistently separate (in the publicly available data) designed QB rushes from scrambles on broken plays, the characteristics of which result in substantially different distributions of play value added."

"It is safe to assume all non-QB rushes are designed rushes. Their rushing model for QBs consists of all scrambles, designed runs, and sacks (to account for skilled rushing QBs minimizing the loss on sacks). "

https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/jqas-2018-0010/html

Advanced Football Analytics

https://www.advancedfootballanalytics.com/

There were many formulas that I wasn't able to reproduce.

There were thetas, deltas and other symbols on equations. Therefore, read the original Article.

From the journal Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports
https://doi.org/10.1515/jqas-2018-0010

No comments
