# https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/lux-ai-season-2/discussion/409394

Topic #409394: 5th place solution
  Author: Harm Buisman
  Posted: 2023-05-10 18:59:30.574000
  Votes: 11  Comments: 2

This has been an amazing journey.

BETA

Late last year I found out about the Beta for Season 2. I had not played season 1, but it looked interesting, so I decided to join. I got hooked immediately. 

I went into the Beta with the plan to convert my Python Kore2022 approach to this competition. I copied the board mechanics and planned to do a similar approach for searching routes based on almost perfect knowledge on power consumption and mining profits. This turned out to be a considerable endeavor, mainly due to the effects of rubble on the power consumption. The marsquake, a beta feature, was a complicating factor. I liked the discussions on game mechanics with the other contestants on discord and being able to contribute via some pull requests on github.

Season 2

When the official competition started I had a lot of basics in place and decided to go for the first sprint reward with a very aggressive bot that swarmed the enemy with lights. It was successful in getting first place in the sprint, but I was amazed by the strategy from ryandy who leveraged the lichen for power option in a formidable way and was aggressive with heavy bots on the primary ice spot. I took down my submission and in hiding I moved my strategy in the same direction.

After sprint one @ryandy22 came to overpower the leaderboard and even managed to break the Kaggle scoring system. Just for that reason he would have deserved this win!

Halfway during the official competition the top RL contestant was team Deimos with @qimailias their spokesperson. My agent had troubles dealing with their agent and it seemed a rock, paper, scissor game. My agent beat ryandy, ryandy beat deimos, deimos beat me. This is telling for the diversity of strategies that this season sparked and probably also a reason why the finale was so crazy with top 4 being superclose and changing last day.

One quick riser late in the competition was @philippkostuch. He had a very unique approach going full solar. He even posted his manifesto on solar which I found convincing. Being under heavy pressure by the congalines of @ttigga and the slow moving light swarm of death from @danmctree I made the risky step to invest heavy in solar. It turned out to be too risky as I did not manage polish it enough to get back on top, which was disappointing, but it was nevertheless fun to see the glimps of the potential of this daring approach.

Overall solution

Early game

Starting positions were super important in this competition. I determined best starting position by ranking the according to ice and ore in the neighbourhood, with additional points for touching ice/ore, amount of rubble nearby, existence of a rubble-free lake and information on nearby factories. 

Based on the score of the positions I determined my bidding, which increased with the difference between the score of the best and second-best position, as well as whether there was an imbalance between positions on the map that have both touching ore and ice.

Main game

Each turn I calculated the future positions of all bots and unplanned any of my own bots that were in violation, e.g. due to colliding. Bots without an action I tried to replan. I had a priority scheme which more or less: handle low water factories &gt; charge heavies that are digging &gt; adjacent attack opportunities &gt; defense &gt; attack &gt; mining &gt;  set up sentry positions.

This worked well with a reasonable amount of bots, but once the bots got cluttered it was hard to determine good actions that would not lead to collision, particularly as I did not want to replan heavies.

Overall the meta game was to build up an economy while monitoring for enemy factories low on water or enemy bots low on power. Rubble clearing was targeted toward clearing a path to the closest ore and closest rubble free lake. I tried to put some pressure on distant enemy resource spots and attack lichen, particularly when connect by a single line. 

Some things for improvement:

•    After moving to solar I think I put too much emphasis on double touching ore/ice over a rubble free area
•    I did not have conga lines, which was a great miss
•    My water carrier attacking could have been more effective
•    My code was computation intensive, meaning I could hardly run experiments between versions of my agent. Combining that with the volatility of the Kaggle scoring it was sometimes hard to judge if something was an improvement or not

Conclusions

My main goal when starting this competition was to get a gold medal to move to Kaggle master rank. Goal achieved! 
What I did not expect is the fun and sense of community I experienced when doing the beta and the main competition using discord. Stone Tao has been an incredible host of the competition. Sometimes I felt he had an answer ready even before I typed in the question. Thank so much to you @stonet2000 and @bovard for making this competition possible. Thanks for the sponsors to chip in for such a nice set of prizes.

I want to thank the many people that made this competition a joy to participate in and keep pushing the boundaries. Thanks to:



@ryandy22 for breaking the scoring system and being a formidable opponent

@ttigga for beautiful conga lines, for finding flaws in the competition and not holding back to call them out

@danmctree for swarming me with hundreds of bots and bringing joy to the discord channel

@ferdinandlimburg for putting RL on #1 just as people were discussing if RL would even have a chance

@qimailias and his team for submitting their RL early in the competition and showing its power in combat

@philippkostuch for his unconventional ideas and sharp insights

illimar for keeping us scared of his RL that sadly never came

@paradite and @rooklift for bringing joy during the beta, you were missed in the official competition!

@utkuearas for posting this wonderful meme in the discord channel, it has been spot on.


@jmerle for making a formidable visualizer

@bovard for making all this possible, enjoy your leave!

@stonet2000 for being the best competition host on the platform


Hope to see many of you in a future competition!

The code can be found here: https://github.com/harmbuisman/lux_ai_season2_5th

Comments:
├─ SiestaGuru (2023-05-11 07:44:23.623000) [+1]
│  Thanks for the writeup! I enjoyed our discord conversations and your well balanced balanced strategy and ice-tile denying skills were frightening till the end. How were you able to so consistently ...
├─ Aisuluu Ulan kyzy (2023-05-14 18:02:06.933000) [+1]
│  thanks for post, very creative content
