# https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/kore-2022/discussion/339972

Topic #339972: 20th place solution: rule-based economic model
  Author: Andrew Tratz
  Posted: 2022-07-27 01:21:33.068000
  Votes: 23  Comments: 6

Congratulations to all competitors. Here's a summary of my solution, which is entirely rules-based. I attempted to treat this as an economic modeling problem combined with path optimization (described at https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/kore-2022/discussion/336804)

Momentum



Build a look-ahead "momentum" model of the board for the next 30 turns

Build balance-of-power matrices which show maximum force projection for the players for each square over the 30 turn horizon


Valuation



Estimate the net present value (NPV) of a new ship, assuming no combat, using a 1% discount rate

Estimate the NPV of a new base, assuming the new ship NPV, existing production capacity, estimated income, and kore

Zero out the new base NPV if I already have more shipyards than the enemy but also fewer ships, to avoid over-extension 


Priority Spawning



Create a priority queue for new ship construction

Any shipyard which is under active capture threat gets critical priority for new production as well as kore set aside for production in future turns, if needed

Neighboring shipyards which could reach the threatened yard get high priority for new production

Assign normal priority to all other shipyards

Create SPAWN actions for high and critical priority shipyards only. If we run out of kore, add those yards back to the launch queue.

If there are any critical or high priority spawns going on, disable new base building


Launch vs. Normal Priority Spawning



In the early game, wait for enemy to make the first launch so we might be able to opportunistically get a bigger payoff from a foray into the mid-board

If I have less than 21 ships at a shipyard and kore to spend, prioritize spawning over launching

Otherwise, launch!


Risk Adjustment



If I have a numerical advantage, adjust the balance-of-power matrices in my favor so I begin taking more risks (i.e. penetrating deeper into enemy territory than I would normally deem safe).


Strategic Labelling of Home Bases



Estimate the economic value of each base (for me and the competitor).

If the base is actively threatened, assign this value to the square for each time step prior to its capture

Also assign the same value to destroying the inbound fleet

If my current fleet is large enough to prevent the capture, ignore negative balance-of-power when defending home bases


Strategic Labelling of Enemy Bases



Estimate the economic value of each base (for me and the competitor).

Assign the value to this square but use a 1% time discount to encourage my fleets to capture it sooner


Balance of Power Strategy Labelling



Note: this portion of the algorithm implemented in Cython for speed

For each shipyard, including enemy shipyards, look at each arrival time step and its implications on the balance-of-power matrix for neighboring shipyards.

If a home shipyard's balance-of-power is always positive, ignore it. It should be safe.

If not, see if our arrival at a given destination in a given time step can shift the balance-of-power in our favor

If it can shift it entirely positve, assign 50% of the yard's value to the destination

If it can shift only some time steps positive, assign at most 5% of the base's value to the destination depending on the proportion of time steps which have flipped positive.

Do the same for the enemy bases, however only assign the maximum value of the base which I am threatening since I can't simultaneously capture multiple bases with the same fleet.


Create Trial Paths



Create a list of possible fleet sizes: full size, half full, 21, 13, 8, 5, 3, and 2. If I already have a very large number of ships at the shipyard, skip some of the smaller sizes.

Create a "zombie" fleet size of "full size". Zombie fleets try to avoid mining kore and hone in on enemy bases or fleets as quickly as possible.

Calculate minimum efficient time to be "ships at shipyard" divided by "fleet size"

Calculate minimum bottleneck time as the turn at which our kore reserves will run out if we produce every turn. I.e. try to avoid arriving back home in a turn when the base would like to be producing new ships.

Run optimal path finding algorithm on each possible fleet size, constrained by the minimum efficient time and minimum bottleneck time

If our new base NPV is positive but we don't have enough ships, create a maximum time constraint so that fleets will coalesce into larger sizes so we can build the base.

There is also effectively a maximum time constraint applied in the strategy labelling step, depending on which shipyard destination the fleet is heading to.

Select the best path among the trial options, optimizing for best kore-per-time-per-ship among the paths with maximal strategic value, constrained by the maximum and minimums described above. 


Zombie conversion



If my best path is an attempted base capture but there's some possibility it will fail, re-run the algorithm using the same fleet size as a zombie and use this path instead.


Zombie march



Look for vulnerable enemy bases that my fleet ignored but which I could capture given enough air support from other fleets. 

Do another trial path using a zombie fleet targeted at this base only. If this gives me a higher value, use this path instead.


Base building



If my new base NPV is positive and greater than my best flight plan value, create a new base instead of my original plan

Look for suitable base locations, ideally 6 squares away near lots of kore (by absolute value) and kore "seeds" of any size (i.e. future mining potential). Give higher weight to kore located on the same X or Y axis. Try to build dominance in the best areas (e.g. center, sides, corners) before expanding elsewhere.

Use the path optimization algorithm to define the path to the new base location


Normal priority spawning



For any shipyard not launching fleets, create a SPAWN action if we still have kore left

Comments:
├─ The Devastator (2022-07-27 23:56:31.267000) [+0]
│  Thanks for sharing your solution! Would you mind sharing your code as well? It would be really helpful.
│  
│  The Devastator.
  ├─ Andrew Tratz (2022-07-28 02:44:06.797000) [+0]
  │  Sure, code is now available at https://github.com/pinky1812/kore
├─ Ravi Ramakrishnan (2022-07-27 16:56:54.850000) [+0]
│  Thanks for explaining your solution and the method in detail! I have learnt a lot from this, also I appreciate your approach and structured thinking and ideation! 
│  Great work! Keep it up! Congratul...
├─ oliver (2022-07-27 05:51:54.860000) [+0]
│  Thanks so muchf or sharing and explaining this Solution Andrew. I learned a lot from it and your previous post too. Quite amazing how algos I learned in my first semester were so useful, who would ...
  ├─ Andrew Tratz (2022-07-27 14:11:14.120000) [+1]
  │  Thank you! Here are a few notes on valuation:
  │  
  │  
  │  
  │  
  │  Expected income is determined by mining rate (based on average fleet size) and average kore per square (including squares with zero kore), with est...
  ├─ oliver (2022-07-28 05:41:06.003000) [+0]
  │  Thanks a lot for explaining! 
  │  Great solution congrats! Super smart way to prevent timeouts, I'll try to also think of it in the next iteration of this game.
  │  Cheers!
