# https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/maze-crawler/discussion/696210

Topic #696210: How to Get Started + Competition's Official Discord
  Author: Addison Howard
  Posted: 2026-05-01 16:28:14.170000
  Votes: 5  Comments: 0

Information for First Timers

New to machine learning and data science? No question is too basic or too simple. Feel free to start your own thread, or use this thread as a place to post any first-timer clarifying questions for the Kaggle community to help you with!

New to Kaggle? Take a look at a few videos to learn a bit more about site etiquette, Kaggle lingo, and how to enter a competition using Kaggle Notebooks. Publish and share your models on Kaggle Models!

Looking for a Team? Express your interest in joining a team through our Team Up feature.

Remember: Kaggle is for everyone. Whether you're teaming up or sharing tips in the competition forum, we expect everyone to follow our Kaggle community guidelines.

Competition's Official Discord

In addition to this competition forum, you can continue the discussion in our official Kaggle Discord Server here:

discord.gg/kaggle

The Discord is a great place to ask getting started questions, chat about the nuances of this competition, and connect with potential team mates. Learn more about Discord at our announcement here. Here are a few things to keep in mind though:

1. Discord Competition Channels are 'Public' - Don't Share Private Information

Discord channels for specific competitions are considered 'public' spaces where you are allowed to talk about competition details. Please remember that private sharing of competition code or data outside of your team is, as always, not permitted. Code sharing must always be done publicly through the Kaggle forums/notebooks.

2. Discord Competition Channels are Not Monitored by Staff - Keep Important Information on the Kaggle Forums

Kaggle Staff and Hosts running competitions will not monitor Discord or be available to answer questions in Discord. This is intended to be a more casual space to discuss competitions and help each other. Please keep important questions, insights, writeups, and other valuable conversation on the Kaggle forums. 

Happy modeling!

No comments
