# https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/playground-series-s3e18/discussion/421462

Topic #421462: Mid summary: Everything you need to know for the second half of the competition
  Author: The Devastator
  Posted: 2023-07-05 13:03:26.930000
  Votes: 41  Comments: 2

Hey everyone!

We just passed the first half of the competition.
A great time to look back at everything we discovered and plan ahead.

After reading through everything, I came up with a summary of the major pieces of information found throughout the different discussions.

Let me know if there is anything missing! 

Enjoy!

(And good luck!)



Starting materials and adjutant resources By Ravi Ramakrishnan

In this post, Ravi Ramakrishnan shared a collection of helpful resources for getting started with this competition.
There are some domain links and multilabel classification links.
But most importantly there is also a link to a previous competition about enzyme stability prediction that might be helpful for reference.



Domain Knowledge Regarding the Data By Luis Frentzen

Interesting post providing an overview of the multi-label classification problem we are faced with on this competition.

Some key points:



Task: Input: Molecules | Output: Classified into their respective Enzyme Commission (EC1 and EC2) classes.

Dataset: Each row represents a molecule to be classified into it's corresponding EC classes.

Target: The EC number is a numerical classification scheme for enzymes based on the chemical reactions they catalyze. (EC Classes: Oxidoreductases, Transferases, Hydrolases, Lyases, Isomerases, Ligases.)

Data Source: The dataset is synthetically generated from the Multi-label Classification of enzyme substrates dataset.

Imbalanced Classes: The target variables have an imbalanced distribution.



  
The Features:
  
Molecular Descriptors:
  

  
ExactMolWt: Exact molecular weight
  
HeavyAtomMolWt: Molecular weight of heavy atoms only (excluding hydrogens)
  
NumHeteroatoms: Number of heteroatoms (atoms other than carbon and hydrogen)

  
These variables provide information about the size, weight, and presence of specific atoms in the molecule.
  
  
Connectivity and Structural Descriptors:
  

  
BertzCT: Bertz complexity index
  
Chi1: 1st order molecular connectivity index
  
Chi1n: Chi1 normalized
  
Chi1v: 1st order molecular variance connectivity index
  
Chi2n: 2nd order molecular connectivity index
  
Chi2v: 2nd order molecular variance connectivity index
  
Chi3v: 3rd order molecular variance connectivity index
  
Chi4n: 4th order molecular connectivity index, normalized

  
These variables capture different aspects of the connectivity and complexity of the molecule.
  
  
Surface Area Contribution Descriptors:
  

  
EState_VSA1: Electrotopological state
  
EState_VSA2: Electrotopological state
  
PEOE_VSA10: Partial equalization of orbital electronegativity Van der Waals surface area contribution for a specific atom type
  
PEOE_VSA14: Partial equalization of orbital electronegativity Van der Waals surface area contribution for a specific atom type
  
PEOE_VSA6: Partial equalization of orbital electronegativity Van der Waals surface area contribution for a specific atom type
  
PEOE_VSA7: Partial equalization of orbital electronegativity Van der Waals surface area contribution for a specific atom type
  
PEOE_VSA8: Partial equalization of orbital electronegativity Van der Waals surface area contribution for a specific atom type
  
SMR_VSA10: Solvent-accessible surface area Van der Waals surface area contribution for a specific atom type
  
SMR_VSA5: Solvent-accessible surface area Van der Waals surface area contribution for a specific atom type
  
SlogP_VSA3: LogP-based surface area contribution
  
VSA_EState9: E-state fragment contribution for Van der Waals surface area calculation

  
These descriptors provide information about the surface area contributions for specific atom type fragments within the molecule.
  
  
Fingerprint Density Descriptors:
  

  
FpDensityMorgan1: Morgan fingerprint density for radius 1
  
FpDensityMorgan2: Morgan fingerprint density for radius 2
  
FpDensityMorgan3: Morgan fingerprint density for radius 3

  
These descriptors represent the density or count of specific substructures in the Morgan fingerprint.
  
  
Classes:
  

  

EC1: Binary feature, to be predicted label (Oxidoreductases)
  

  
Catalyze oxidation-reduction reactions, involving the transfer of electrons between molecules.
  

EC2: Binary feature, to be predicted label (Transferases)
  

  
Transfer functional groups (e.g., methyl, acetyl, phosphoryl) between molecules.
  

EC3: Binary feature of the EC class (Hydrolases)
  

  
Catalyze the hydrolysis (breaking of chemical bonds with water) of various substances.
  

EC4: Binary feature of the EC class (Lyases)
  

  
Catalyze the addition or removal of groups from substrates without hydrolysis or oxidation.
  

EC5: Binary feature of the EC class (Isomerases)
  

  
Catalyze the rearrangement of atoms within a molecule to form isomers (same molecular formula, different arrangement).
  

EC6: Binary feature of the EC class (Ligases)
  

  
Catalyze the joining of two molecules through the formation of new chemical bonds.
  

Note about the features: Some features are highly imbalanced.*
  


The post also contains additional reading material if you are curious to learn more about the topic.



Not "multi-label", but two competitions in one By AmbrosM

As per the usual, AmbrosM drops a very interesting discussion topic.
The main claim is the these might be two different problems with common features BUT different targets.

Evidence:



KNN needs 1180 neighbors to predict EC1; BUT 490 for predicting EC2.

RandomForest beats ExtraTrees on EC1 but for EC2 this is the opposite.

LogisticRegression is better than KNN for EC1 but not for EC2.
code (Read the full post for more details)




[You won't guess my best single model for EC2]() By AmbrosM

Again, AmbrosM dropping interesting posts.
In summary:



EC1: The best model is tree-based.

EC2: The best model is Bagged KNN.



  
What is Bagged KNN? 🤔
  It is a KNN that is used inside a BaggingClassifier. [In simple words: Multiple models on random subsets]

model = make_pipeline(([('log',
                                          FunctionTransformer(.log1p), log_features)],
                                          remainder='passthrough'),
                                          StandardScaler(),
                                          BaggingClassifier(
                                                                ( = , weights = 'distance'),
                                                                n_estimators = ,
                                                                bootstrap = False,
                                                                max_features = ,
                                                                random_state = 
                                                           )
                       )

  
Full code


(All credit for this code goes to AmbrosM)



Feature Engineering Ideas By Niveditha Vudayagiri



In this post, [Niveditha Vudayagiri](Niveditha Vudayagiri LINK) shares with us a list of ChatGPT feature engineering ideas for the competition.


But even more interestingly:



Konstantin Dmitriev in the comments went out testing them and came back with feature importances!


**The most important features for *EC1* were:**



NumHeteroatoms_EC1, Atom Weight and Charge, PEOE_VSA14, Electronic State and Shape, EState_VSA1, Chemical Diversity, PEOE_VSA10, PEOE_VSA8, Molecular Shape and Flexibility, SlogP_VSA3, PEOE_VSA7, Molecular Complexity, MaxAbsEStateIndex, SMR_VSA10, BertzCT


**And the most important features for *EC2* were:**



PEOE_VSA7, NumHeteroatoms_EC2, PEOE_VSA6, SMR_VSA5, SlogP_VSA3, Functional Group Occurrence, EState_VSA2, fr_COO_EC2, Chi4n, Chi2n, PEOE_VSA10, SMR_VSA10, VSA_EState9, FpDensityMorgan1, Structural Flexibility


Full code can be found here.



Implementing the metric optimally By Ravi Ramakrishnan



The competition rules state that we are measured with AUC for each target and the final score is an avg AUC of each predicted column.

But some notebooks are using a different implementation: They calculate the GINI score by converting the GT and the predictions into a single continuous array of EC1 and EC2 stacked together.

Further testing a more accurate implementation yields scores that are less optimistic (and more realistic) than the ones reported in the notebooks.


Another implementation in the comments (broccoli beef):

def (y_true,y_pred):
    return np.([(y_true[:,i],y_pred[:,i]) for i in (y_true.shape[])])




Less is perhaps more for EC2 By Ravi Ramakrishnan



EC2 is harder to predict than EC1. (Our predictions are just above random)

ChatGPT features are heavily used in this competition and many features might be redundant.


From the comments:



Mateusz Kowalczyk performed some feature selection and found out that

After normalizing and scaling the data, ten highly correlated features were identified (BertzCT, ExactMolWt, HeavyAtomMolWt, Chi1, Chi1n, Chi1v, Chi2n, Chi2v, Chi3v, Chi4n) and reduced to one variable using PCA.

Trick: Random columns were added for comparison.

Feature Selection Method: Mutual information and Random Forest were used to assess feature importance.

Result: Around 19 features were found to be important for EC1, while only 7 were important for EC2.


Note: There is another post by bogoconic1 about this topic.



There are values in fr_COO and fr_COO2 that appear in test data but NOT in training data By bogoconic1



We have a situation here!

Some integer_values/categories appear in the test data but not in the training data. (Columns: fr_COO and fr_COO2)


Also from the comments:



Konstantin Dmitriev Added that there is no fr_COO == 7 and fr_COO2 == 7 in both train and original datasets.

And that NumHeteroatoms == 40 and NumHeteroatoms == 48 are also absent both in train and original datasets.



  
I would like add a trick for these types of problems:
  The most obvious solution would be to remove out of distribution values from the test data on prediction [or to clip them].
  BUT there is another trick for this: Frequency encoding.
  You basically use something like df.groupby('column').transform('count') / len(df) to create a new feature based on the frequency of each value in the column.
  And this work also in test time because what you say to the model is "A value that is rare". This is WITHOUT specifying the value itself. So OTHER rare values that are present in the training set hold the same information.
  [This example is just one way to do this, search for "frequency encoding" if you want to see many variations of this method. I just wanted to point this out! :)]




Fishing outliers By Yan Teixeira


  
Very interesting discussion in this post!!




Yan Teixeira discusses the presence of extreme outliers in the data and this being a common problem in many playground competitions.

But here is the problem: Oftentimes when removing the outliers, somehow the model performance decreases.


From the comments:



Luís Fernando Torres suggested that this is where domain knowledge should come to the rescue.

broccoli beef explained that outliers are often being decided based upon: 1. Value being unrealistic: OK in this case because the data is synthetic. 2. Statistical Anomaly: But most people underestimate how much "far away" a point should be in the plot to actually be considered an outlier.

Luís Fernando Torres also suggested the following link for further reading about the topic.




Adversarial validation ensures it's okay to include the original dataset By Konstantin Dmitriev



Konstantin Dmitriev used adversarial validation to check if it is okay to combine the training and original datasets and came to a conclusion that it is.
code


From the comments:
Abhijeetsingh Meena, broccoli beef and Saw Jing Xien had a followup interesting discussion about this topic. (Suggested to read)



Tips, techniques &amp; how not to overfit By Rashmi Margani

Rashmi Margani shared with us a list of tricks (Many coming from a somewhat similar past competition, please add credit next time..)

Some interesting tricks that you might want to try are:



Clipping lower and upper predictions when training to avoid overfitting

Try label smoothing in the training loss

Train the same model using different seeds and avg the result to make a more robust ensemble.

Try to stratify the multiple labels (MultilabelStratifiedKFold) to obtain a more robust evaluation.

Optimize a single model rather then an ensemble of models. (And then ensemble them)





  
Note: This is not ChatGPT. I am actually reading everything.

Comments:
├─ HarshaVardhanBabu (2023-07-07 10:20:34.950000) [+0]
│  Thanks a lot for the tips.
│  The label smoothing link is broken, can you please fix it.
│  Thanks.
├─ Riya Raizada (2024-02-19 05:37:44.533000) [+1]
│  Thank for tips
